Page 1:
THE TOMASSONI FAMILY HISTORY (Modified 2010, Modified 2011)
Guido Tomassoni (my Dad) was born in Costaciaro, Italy on April 20, 1890. Children in his family consisted of Egisto (the oldest), Luigi (called Pilo), Guido (Guy), Teresa, and Valeria. His parents' names were Biaggo and Francesca. In 1906, when my Dad was 16, he and his brothers, Egisto and Pilo, left Costaciaro and came to the United States. Teresa married Bino Constantini and they also came to Hibbing. Valeria never left Italy. Rita told me recently that Dad’s father had been married previously and had two daughters by that wife. These girls were quite a bit older than Dad’s group.
I never did talk too much with Dad about his life in Italy, but he did tell me a few things. His family lived as most people did—in a two-story home. The upstairs was for the family, and the ground floor belonged to the cows. It was intended this way because the cows were a good source of heat in the wintertime.
The town had at least two communal features. There was a local oven for baking bread—people would bring their pre-prepared dough to this oven and get their week’s supply of bread. Also, the town had one shepherd who was hired to take all of the local cows to pasture in the morning and return them to their owners in the evening.
Dad started on the clarinet when he was 7 years old. I don’t know if the one he played in Hibbing was from Italy or not. Don’t even know where it is today. Dad’s education extended through the 3rd grade.
Josephine (my Mom) was born in Iron Mountain, Michigan, on June 16, 1893. Her parents were Ubaldo Sabattini (Nono) and Sperendia Nardi (Nona). Nono and Nona are Italian for Grandfather and Grandmother. Her family moved to Hibbing, Minnesota, in 1903. Mom was 9 years old at that time. Children in the family were Edward (the oldest), Mary, Josephine (Mom), Louis, Calvin (Cal), Elsie, and William (Billy). Johnny was the last of the children born, but he died when he was seven years old. Mom’s education maxed out at the 8th grade.
My grandfather, Ubaldo, worked in the construction of tunnels in northern Italy. In the 1880s, he moved with Nona from Sigillo, Italy, to Scranton, Pennsylvania. Nona had given birth to a son in Italy, but he died there. Uncle Ed was born in Scranton in 1889. Then the family moved to Iron Mountain, Michigan, where the rest of the children were born. In 1903, the family moved by train to Hibbing, Minnesota, transferring in Duluth.
North Hibbing, where Mom’s family settled, was the original part of town, but since it was located on top of iron ore strata, the town eventually moved south. This took place over a period of time. I remember watching the moving of several buildings. Some large buildings, such as the school, the courthouse where I obtained my first driver’s license at age 16, and some apartment buildings that were too large to move, were simply destroyed. By the 1950s, there was little or nothing left of North…
Page 2
Hibbing. The mines and/or vegetation had encroached on most of it. Currently, there is a nice lookout at the mine edge for tourists.
There was a living room and two bedrooms. Internal running water and a full bathroom were added later. The front entrance, which was actually on the side of the house, had a mail slot and a box to hold all the mail. I thought that was a cute idea. The house was heated by a pot-belly wood stove in the living room—no insulation. The wood-burning kitchen stove was used not only for cooking, but also kept burning in the winter to heat the kitchen. A shed off the kitchen housed easily accessible wood for heating and cooking as well as other things. The yard consisted of dirt and uncut weedy grass. Not many people had lawn mowers in those days; mowers, of course, were human-powered. I remember the many fun-time family get-togethers that were held there, much like we do at Paul’s for Christmas.
After Nono died and all the kids left home, Nona would keep warm in the wintertime by sleeping on her rocking chair near the pot-belly stove. When it would turn cold, she would awaken and put another log in the fire.
Nona was born in 1864 and died February 5, 1943, at age 79. She lived in the old North Hibbing house until she got ill and then stayed with us in the apartment above our store for a few months until her death. She slept in my bedroom and I slept on the living room couch. Chet had already left home and was in Minneapolis attending the Dunwoody trade school studying to be a machinist. I don’t know the actual cause of her death except that she seemed very old to me. She was the only grandparent I really knew because she was around until I was 18.
Nono (Ubaldo) was born in 1856 and died in 1934 at age 78. He was a diabetic and lost his sight when I was about 5-6 years old. He also developed leg problems and had one of his legs amputated because of gangrene. He died shortly after that. I was 9 at the time of his death, and although I was never very close to him, I remember his passing very well. Nono had a brother (Joachino) in Scranton, PA. His offspring may still be in the area. He also had another brother (Joseppi) who died by drowning when he was young. There may be other brothers/sisters, but I am not aware of any.
While Dad worked in the Hibbing mines, he and some other boys lived at Nona’s home. They slept in the attic, and since the houses were not insulated and were heated from the stove downstairs, they slept near the chimney to keep warm. It was very hot in the attic in the summer. They awakened very early to go to work in the mines (underground mines at that time) and had to walk a long distance. Nono also walked with them to the mines. Very few people had cars, and there was little or no public transportation at that time. Nona got up early to prepare breakfast and the…


Page 3
Lunch buckets for the workers. Sometimes she didn’t have all the lunches prepared in time, so Mom and her sister Mary occasionally had to walk the lunches to the mines (about 2-3 miles round trip).
Nona had a cow that was kept in a little shed in the backyard. She put the cow out in the field and milked it every day. She sold some of the milk to the neighbors. I never got too friendly with that cow because it was too big and scary for me. She must have sold the cow when I was still a little kid.
Nona also earned extra money by doing laundry for some ‘rich’ people, whoever they were. So along with the tasks of keeping house and caring for the family, she also took care of and milked the cow, cooked the meals, fed the boarders, and did all the laundry—by hand. She was a very busy woman, but the children did help out.
I never knew my father’s parents who lived in Italy. His father died before I was born. I remember the day my father was notified of the death of his mother. He told me about it when we were working in the store together, and I felt so sorry for him. I was a teen then. He was sad because he had not seen his mother for almost 20 years.
In 1911, when Dad was 21, he went back to Italy to serve in the army. Italian youths were required by law to serve 2 years in the military. He felt obliged to go back even though he was becoming attached to his new life and land. He knew how to play the clarinet (started learning when he was about 7 years old), so when he volunteered in the army, he was placed in the military band. At that time, Italy may have been at war with another country. I’m not sure about this. Dad’s being in the band was great because there would be minimal chance for military action. He told me that the band members were periodically asked to volunteer to go to Ethiopia. The men had agreed that if one volunteered, they all would. The group would be lined up, and when the officer asked for volunteers, each one waited for the other, but there were no takers. Dad came back to Hibbing in 1913 (23 years old) when his service time was over.
Dad and Mom had met in 1910 and had taken up with each other. Since Dad had to return to Italy to serve his required time in the military, Dad did ask Mom to marry him before he left for Italy, but she didn’t want to at that time as she was only 18. He asked if she would remember him while he was gone. According to Mom, she didn’t make any promises and gave him little encouragement. I guess she didn’t know if he was ever coming back and she wanted to keep her options open.
He actually wrote her love letters from Italy, but Mom said she didn’t answer much. The interesting thing about Dad’s letter writing is that much later, around 1950, he admitted that the love letters he wrote were actually copies of letters that he got from his brother, Egisto, who had obtained the letters from an Italian newspaper. Dad’s heart was in the right place anyhow. I often wondered about how many other women got copies of those letters.
Page 4:
Before Mom was married she worked in the Itasca Department Store, where she managed the dish and glassware department located in the store basement. The basement was flooded once because of a heavy rain and Mom had to clean up the big mess. She became ill because of exposure to contaminated water—probably sewage backup. During her illness she lost all her hair and almost died. There was no health insurance in those days.
When Dad got back from Italy, he asked Mom to marry him again. She accepted, and they were married on April 20, 1914, Dad’s 24th birthday. Mom was 21 years old. The marriage was performed in the Immaculate Conception Church in North Hibbing by Father Gilli, originally from Sigillo, Italy. Was there a honeymoon?
Egisto, Dad’s oldest brother, had also gone to Italy to serve in the military. While he was there he married Marrietta Gambucci whom he later brought to Hibbing. They had 3 daughters—Lydia, Laura, and Irene. Egisto was killed in an auto accident when the children were quite young. This was before my time. He was on the outside of the car, standing on the running board (which all the old cars had). The car must have hit a bad spot on the dirt road and Egisto was thrown from the car and hit his head on a rock. Some time later, Marrietta married Santana Luchetti. Flora and Eva were born to them. I always considered them as cousins even though they were not blood relations. Lydia died in 1993, and Laura suffered a small stroke and is now living with one of her daughters. The others are all OK.
Teresa, Dad’s sister, married Bino Constantini. Tony and Julio, their sons, still live in Hibbing.
I knew Pilo, Dad’s older brother very well because I was closer to his family than the others. He married Sarafina Pambiano, who was also from Costacciaro, Italy. They had two sons, Blaze (Biaggio) and Nando (Fernando). Blaze married Helen Bobich, my sister Rita’s sister-in-law. Blaze died of a heart attack in 1996. After playing golf, which he loved, he began to experience chest and arm pains and died minutes later. Blaze and Helen had 2 children (son and daughter), and lived most of their married lives in Cherry Hill, NJ. Their son was killed in a skateboard accident while attending Villanova College. Their daughter, Beth, married a man originally from England, and they live and work in Washington, DC. Helen now lives with Beth.
Nando, Pilo’s 2nd son, was born about one month before I was born (May 24, 1925). He is currently enjoying retirement in Cape Coral, FL. He spent many years working in Washington DC for the federal government. When Mom and I worked in DC we would often have lunch with Nando who worked in FEMA about one block from our building. He married a little later in life to a nice lady who had lost her husband and already had a child. She died from cancer in about 1985. They had a daughter (LeeAnn) who lives and works in Washington. She is not yet married.
Update June 19, 2011—Nando died on November 4, 2011 in Fort Myers FL. He was a decorated World War II and Korean Conflict veteran. Because of his service he was interred with full military honors at the Arlington National Cemetery on April 27…
Page 5
2011, I attended the service, and it was indeed very honorable to have a cousin buried at the national cemetery. I also took videos of the occasion.
I speak of cousins Blaze and Nando more than the others because I was closer to them.
Dad, as well as most of the men in Hibbing, worked in the iron mines. Much of the mining at that time was done underground. An important piece of equipment the miners used underground was a special helmet that had a calcium carbide lamp attached. This burned with a small flame that provided light for the miners to see where to go and dig. Most of the digging was done manually by pick and shovel. When the Great Depression hit, many people lost their jobs. Although life was tough with a job, it was miserable with no job. This hurt Dad quite a bit. This was supposed to be the great land of opportunity.
In 1930, Dad and Uncle Charlie Gambucci joined to buy Checco’s grocery store, renting the building from Checco (5-year lease). Mom and Mary (Mom’s sister and Charlie’s wife) worked long hard hours with their husbands in the store. We lived upstairs and sub-rented extra rooms to supplement family income. Uncle Charlie and Aunt Mary had a nice house in North Hibbing about 1.5 miles away.
In 1935, the store was moved a short distance away from Checco’s (1803 3rd Ave) to Pistilli’s building (1714 3rd Ave) across the street. As in Checco’s, we lived upstairs in an apartment that had only 4 rooms—no extra rooms to rent out. Chet and I slept in the bedroom, Mom and Dad in the living room, and Rita in the little main entrance next to the kitchen.
In 1937, Dad bought an unoccupied building across the street (1719 3rd Ave), separated from Uncle Charlie, and set up his own new grocery store. This building was the building I started school in. A little history on this building—it originally was an open-air theater located in North Hibbing and was later moved south to Park Addition before I was born. It was later converted to a jailhouse. After this, it was converted again, but to the 3-room schoolhouse. The kindergarten and 1st grade were located in the front room, the 2nd grade in the middle, the 3rd grade in the rear. It did have a little backyard that served as a playground.
My kindergarten and first-grade teacher’s name was “Miss Strict,” but she was very nice. I thought she was pretty old, but she was probably in her late twenties. My second-grade teacher, Miss Boylan, was also the principal. Since the grocery store was across the street and we lived upstairs, I only had to cross the street to go to school. I started third grade at the Assumption Hall Catholic School and walked the distance of about 10 blocks. I attended this school until the 8th and highest grade. School buses were available then, but only for those who lived in the farmlands on the outskirts of town. Since there was no problem with separation of church and state then, the school buses picked up both Catholic and public school students. I served as an altar boy in my years at the Church services were held in the school hall until a new church was built next door.
Page 6The three-room school building was eventually abandoned and left empty for some time. My folks bought the building in 1937, separated from Uncle Charlie, and set up their own store. Dad built a 3-bedroom apartment above the store for us to live in, and over a period of time added 5 more apartments, which he rented out. He did all the architectural design, an architect at heart, and took great pride in his work. Had he had the opportunities of my generation, I believe he would have been a good professional architect. The apartments were rented for about $35/month at that time.
The grocery store kept the family very busy—opened at 7 a.m. and usually closed at 6 p.m., but customers also came later to get a little item even when the store was closed and we were eating dinner. Saturdays were the busiest—7 a.m. to 9 p.m. People didn’t have refrigerators and few had ice boxes, so Dad would keep their Saturday meat purchases in his walk-in refrigerator. They would then pick up their order on Sunday morning after church. Without refrigeration, people would usually purchase their food on a mealtime basis—in the morning for lunch and in the afternoon for dinner. We also delivered groceries twice a day for the same reasons.
Dad didn’t go to church (except for Christmas and Easter) like all the other Italian guys. He did, however, recognize the need for it. He was so tuned to the art of butchering meat that he could guess the weight of a cut of meat to within an ounce. He could also guess a person’s weight accurately.
One day, an Italian friend of Dad’s who sold insurance told Dad that it would be a good idea for him to buy insurance for his store windows—just in case somebody might break them accidentally. Dad felt that he didn’t need this because of the several years with no mishaps. So he politely told his friend no. But, about two weeks later—guess what?—one of the store windows was broken in the middle of the night. So Dad was convinced about the need for insurance. I always believed that the insurance ‘friend’ was the culprit.

A little more about my Dad—he learned to play the clarinet in Italy, starting when he was about 7 years old. He also played a tenor saxophone. He played the E-flat clarinet in the Hibbing band for as long as I can remember. He also liked to play bocce ball with his Italian friends. The game was played in the dirt streets in those days. To determine who played first, a man would tap an egg against another’s egg. Who knows where the eggs came from? The one who owned the last unbroken egg got to do the initial choosing. It got to be messy sometimes. After the egg was broken, the owner would slurp it down.
Every Sunday afternoon during the summer, all of the city band members, of which Dad was one, would gather in the downtown area and march, playing great marching songs, to the park where they would give a concert until dark. I was always very proud to see him march directly past our store on 3rd Ave on the way to the park.
And a little more about my Mom. She was a quiet person, and I always thought she was quite beautiful. She was always busy doing things. She not only managed the store…
Page 7
Mom worked many hours in the store as well. She also did a lot of sewing. Her hair was very long, she kept it in a ‘bun’ as most ladies did back then. Some of the ‘things’ she did was to paint and maintain the inner house. She even redecorated the kitchen floor by paint dabbing a design on it after the linoleum wore out. The spaghetti noodles we ate were always made by her hand. I enjoyed watching her go through the process—kinda difficult and time-consuming, kneading the dough, rolling it out, cutting it into the proper shape, and she did this at least once a week—usually on Saturday night. We had to have spaghetti on every Sunday and sometimes on Thursday as well—the Italian tradition. My Mom’s spaghetti sauce was second only to your Mom’s.
She was the disciplinarian. I don’t remember Dad ever scolding me. But her discipline methods were quiet and direct—all she had to do was to look at me and I quickly got the message. After Dad died, she managed the apartments up until she was in her 90s.
Mom was always concerned about health in general. She had purchased a health book that was very thick—it seemed to be around forever. It would cost about $100 today. I believe that she would have made a good nutritionist.
One more thing I should mention about Mom/Dad—which has to do with their generosity:
Customers were never turned away because they couldn’t/wouldn’t pay their grocery bills—it was all credit in those days. The accumulated amount not paid back then would be the equivalent of about $10,000 today.
Dad used his car as a free taxi service for a lot of friends and customers.
At Christmas, the Catholic nuns would come to the store to buy some food to donate to poor families with a lot of kids. Mom and Dad would usually add at least 2-3 times more. I think that the nuns came to Dad’s store because they knew they would get the bigger deal.
When a kid in school was sick for a few days, the nuns would have the other kids bring in a gift such as an apple or orange for the sick kid. Mom would always go a big step further and prepare a full basket of food for me to bring in rather than a single item. With 20-30 kids in class, the sick kid usually got a bushel full of goodies.
STORE STUFF
Dad made the very best pork sausage ever. It was so appreciated by his Italian customers that they would order some before he even started making them. The process was simple—cut the meat off the pork butt bone, grind it, season the ground meat with garlic and some salt, put the seasoned mix into a press that had an extrusion nozzle with a sausage casing (pig intestine), squeeze out the long sausage, make it into desired links.
Page 8
MY BROTHER CHET – (Chester Arthur)
I really do not remember too much about Chet during our young lives. This is because he was always away from home involved with activities with his friends. There never was any lack of any of them for any of us. He was this way most of his young life. I do remember as a teen he would come home from school, prepare his own dinner—he couldn’t waste time waiting for the family dinner time—and then go out to work in Uncle Ed’s machine shop and then scoot off to play ball with his pals. He was very involved athletically, mostly baseball and basketball. We would, however, get to see him at bedtime. Incidentally, we shared the same bed from my toddling up to the time he left home after his High School graduation (1937).
As a teen, Chet delivered the groceries for my Dad. He also got me started to drive the car—a 1937 two-door Ford which was used more for delivering groceries than personal use. When I was 16 (1941), Chet got me in the car and drove to a quiet part of town—1st Ave near the park—got out and said, “John, it’s about time you learned how to drive—get behind the wheel.” I did, and shortly after went with Dad to the courthouse to get my driver’s license. All I had to do was pay 50 cents with my Dad’s approval and that was it. No driver tests back then. This license allowed me to drive—forever. No renewal needed. That, of course, put me in the job of delivering groceries.
Chet left home after graduation to attend the Dunwoody Trade School in Minneapolis—machine shop was his course. That was a long way from home in those days. But he already knew a lot about being a machinist from his experience in Uncle Ed’s Shop.
Later, Chet went to Los Angeles, CA to work as a machinist at the Lockheed Aircraft Co. This was the time when World War II was well on its way. During the time he was with Lockheed, he was being deferred from military service. But as a young fellow, he did not feel that he was adequately serving his country—most young guys in those days were very patriotic and felt that military service was a calling. So he enlisted in the Navy—then volunteered for service in the Construction Battalion (CB’s) Underwater Demolition Team (UDT)—the predecessor of the current Navy SEALS.
The UDT activity was one of the most dangerous in the military at that time. This was because it involved the clearing of harbors of obstructions—placing explosive charges on/in them. The obstructions were placed there to prevent our ships from invading Japanese islands and ports. Fortunately, he and most of his team members survived all the action in the Pacific theater against the Japanese—clearing harbors in various islands so that the Marines could invade with minimum resistance. He told me one time that when it was announced in the news that the Marines had invaded a certain island, the UDT had already been in and out by as much as two weeks earlier.
The strangest part of all this harbor clearing, which involved being in the water with a lot of equipment, was that Chet was not a good swimmer. He accomplished his movement in the water, not by swimming, but by sinking and then bouncing off the bottom with his heavy equipment. He was able to move better than most of his team members because he was taller (6’ 1”)—Amazing.
Page 9
Many people feel that the dropping of the atom bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki was dastardly on the part of the U.S. because of the great loss of lives and damage done essentially instantaneously. But when I think of this, I can’t help but think of Chet also, because if this hadn’t happened, Chet would most likely have been killed along with many others during the Japan invasion process.
Chet’s UDT left the U.S. west coast after a needed rest as per schedule for the planned purpose of clearing harbors in Japan. When they were well on their way, heading across the Pacific toward Japan by ship to clear harbors in preparation for invasion forces, Japan announced their unconditional surrender. As a consequence, the UDT was able to conduct their scheduled Japanese harbor clearing, but without any resistance. There is no doubt in my mind that if the atom bombs had not been used, thousands of lives on both sides would have been lost, including Chet’s during the invasion.
After the war, Chet married Helen Bertolini, a Chisholm gal, worked for Uncle Ed again for a little while, then started a small machine shop of his own in Bemidji, MN, about 100 miles due west from Hibbing. After his contract work ran out (making small gun shell casings), he applied for a job in the mines, but no availabilities. So he decided that college might be worthwhile, at least until a job opportunity came by.
With a wife and two kids, he started college with GI Bill support—and some help from Mom/Dad. He graduated in four years with a degree in mechanical engineering and started work in the mines (they didn’t hire him as a machinist) as a mechanical engineer. I believe he was in his late 30s at that time.
He stayed with the mining company until retirement.
Chet and Helen are in fairly good health at this writing and still live in Hibbing.
MY SISTER RITA (Rita Ann)
Rita and I were pretty close throughout our lives, except in the very early years—I don’t remember much of our relationship at that time. She always gave me encouragement and was even a great help with my homework. But I do know that she was always a very active person—even to this day. In High School, she was a cheerleader and that’s about as active as a girl in school can be. Like Chet, Rita was always out doing something with her friends.
Rita married Mike Bobich in 1943, her first husband, who was from Chisholm, our neighboring town (population about 5,000), about 6 miles away to the east of Hibbing. They had two children—Patti and Tommy. Patti is currently living in Minneapolis, MN, with her husband Bruce Kolcinski, a real nice guy. Tommy is living in Chisholm with his wife Sherri, a very nice gal and a nurse.
Later, Rita and Mike purchased Uncle Charlie’s house in North Hibbing and had it moved to Chisholm. The house had been abandoned because Uncle Charlie and Aunt Mary had sold their store in Park Addition and moved to Pomona, CA... (Text continues on the next page.)
Page 10
But alcoholism got to him. He got worse over the years, which was hard on Rita. Mike died from a heart attack when he was about 50. I’ll always remember that it was Mike who was the primary motivator in encouraging me to attend college. His attitude toward a college degree was that it opened doors to a potentially good future. I believe that he was partly responsible for what my life is today.
Rita currently spends her life with her 2nd husband, Bob Byrns (married in 1970), at the lake in Minnesota during the summer months and in Dundee, FL, during winter. We usually get to visit with them when we go to Florida in November or December.
Update June 19, 2011
Bob Byrns died a few years ago, and Rita has continued on without him. But since she was getting older, she sold her home in Dundee, FL, recently and planned to live in an apartment (during the winter season) near Patti in Minneapolis.
But last May, when Paul and I were visiting, Rita developed problems and she turned very weak and couldn’t be left alone. So Tommy has been staying with her 100% of the time. Many tests were conducted by medical people, and she has recovered somewhat. The upshot so far is that she is scheduled to have her gall bladder removed sometime this week along with some stones in her digestive system. She is upbeat about it all, and Tommy expects that she will be better and be able to return home shortly after the operation, which will take place in Duluth, a very good hospital and staff. I will modify this paragraph when I get the latest on her operation.
The next sections will cover the two regions in Hibbing that I lived in:
Brooklyn, a little community on the east side of the main town.
Park Addition, the community that was located between the park and downtown—one block on each side.
LIFE IN BROOKLYN
Brooklyn was a small community located on the east side of Hibbing with homes, a school, and a few businesses (most of the businesses are gone now). This is where I was born (June 14, 1925, about 7 AM), my mother’s fifth child, in a little house my folks purchased in the early 1920s. The first two children—Frances and Egisto—died when they were infants. Then came Chet and Rita. I still remember several things about this place during my life there—we moved when I was 5 years old (1930).
Things I do remember:
The house had two bedrooms, living, dining, kitchen, bath, and a full basement. It had a nice yard and a one-stall detached garage. The rooms were all quite small by today’s standards. No rugs. Our Ocean Pines living room was larger than this whole house.
It was heated by a coal-fed furnace in the basement, and the heated air was circulated by convection with independent vents into each room. I can still feel the heat that poured out each vent in the winter.

Page 11
Sleeping in the crib, but old enough to climb in and out on my own. A potty was located under the crib for my needs.
After the crib—shared a bed with Chet. I was his bedmate until he left home in the early 1940s.
Mom having a tea party with some neighbor ladies and me watching from the carriage after I woke from a nap—but able to climb in/out on my own.
Pillow fight with Rita in Mom’s bedroom. Hit the Blessed Virgin Mary statue. She survived pretty well—only a broken thumb. Would she ever forgive us? Let alone Mom?
Raspberries growing through the neighbor’s fence. I can still taste them.
Roads were dirt—later enjoyed watching big machines turn them into concrete.
Ice cream dairyman with a horse-drawn carriage. What a treat it was when Dad ran out to buy a pint for us. This was only when he had some extra money.
Dumps—The high piled dirt overburden from the mines—just a block away. At that time, I thought that they were the end of the earth. I couldn’t imagine what was on the other side.
My first airplane sighting—I was on the front porch—peering around the corner of the house. Were there invisible roads in the sky?
Dad’s car—I think it was his first—a Dodge touring sedan. I seem to recall that he used it only for hauling the neighborhood to picnics. It had canvas side curtains—snapped into place above the doors—which didn’t do much for the Minnesota winters. They didn’t do much to keep out the rain either. I don’t know if it even had a heater.
Riding in Dad’s friend’s coupe—laying across the rear window platform.
My first bee sting—on my back—went crying home with pain I had never felt before.
Going to the ‘Italian’ church on Sunday. This was a trudge along the railroad tracks, which were less than 50 yards from our house. The church was about 1 mile away. But, I was lucky—I rode in the kiddie carriage. Father Strobieto was the parish priest for as long as I can remember. He died when I was in college.
Dad kissing Mom goodbye when he went off to work.
I don’t remember celebrating Christmas, holidays, birthdays, or wintertime in Brooklyn.
I grew up during the Great Depression. Although this was a tough period, I really didn’t feel its problems because kids don’t have real responsibilities—just fun and games with friends. It was pretty tough back then. The country was in bad shape economically. I was aware of the concerns that Mom and Dad felt. I know Dad was hurting because he came to this country thinking it was the land of great opportunity.
Dad supplemented his income whenever he could by playing his clarinet or saxophone in a local dance band—usually on Saturday or Sunday nights at some local hall. On occasion, he would play until the wee hours—just in time to change and go off to work in the underground mines. I think that the band played extra hours simply because everyone was having a good time.
Page 12
LIFE IN PARK ADDITION
We moved to Park Addition when I was 5 years old—1930. I guess Dad was tired of on/off work in the underground mines, so he joined with Uncle Charlie Gambucci to become a businessman. They purchased an existing grocery store from Mr. Checco in Park Addition—about 1 mile from where we lived in Brooklyn.
In Hibbing, a town of approximately 16,000 people now—not much less back then—everything seemed to be no more than 1 mile from anyplace. They rented the building from Checco with a 5-year lease. We lived in the upstairs apartment, which had 10 rooms. The extra rooms were rented to supplement income, but all shared the single bathroom. I don’t remember this ever being a problem. Uncle Charlie and Aunt Mary (Mom’s sister) lived in a nice house in North Hibbing.
One of our renters was a young fellow and his wife. He was the manager of one of the dime stores in downtown and usually left a little dish of candy on the living room table for all to share. Needless to say, I made sure I got my share. I thought he was the greatest. Unfortunately, he didn’t stay very long.
Park Addition got its name from being next to the city’s park, which was a great place during my growing-up years. The park is still there, but it does not contain the fun things it used to have, such as:
A large zoo (had lions and sea lions, as well as a variety of birds, bears, monkeys, and other animals).
Playground, baseball park, and a bandstand with parking space for Sunday night concerts.
Two kiddy swimming pools, with two bathhouses—one for the boys and one for the girls.
One day, Dad brought home a little puppy for me, which I named ‘Sparky’. When he was nearly full-grown, he got under the bathhouse in the park one day and apparently couldn’t get out. After some of the kids heard his whimpering, Chet and his friends dug underneath and finally got him out. He was killed a few years later chasing/barking after a car—which he did too much of.
The ‘woods’ were located one block to the west. This was also a great place for kids. I don’t know how it got to be called the ‘woods’ because there weren’t too many big trees there, but there was a lot of natural open space, swimming ‘holes’, big ‘dumps’ farther beyond, and wild berry picking.
Gooseberries, pin cherries, and ‘choke’ cherries were all over.
Choke cherries are the same as the wild cherries that grow in the tree in the back of our Ocean Pines house. Picked too soon, these cherries will pucker your lips real good.
Pin cherries are red and small but taste much like the cherries that grow in Carol’s front yard.
The water tower was located in the park, about two blocks from my house. Many of the kids would climb this tower just for kicks and to get a good view of the whole town. I climbed it just a few times, but specifically to launch my model gliders.
One was so well-balanced that it flew almost two blocks away to the east.
Others simply circled gracefully down.
A group of us (about 5) climbed it at night during WWII when the town was going to practice a complete blackout—all city lights were turned off.

Page 13
Including car lights would be turned off. Blackouts were occasionally practiced in many of the cities around the country, but mostly on the coasts. This was done in the event that enemy (airplanes or ships) might use the city lights to their advantage (drop bombs or invade).
I was never able to rationalize why we needed to practice blackouts in northern Minnesota, because we were about 1500 miles from each coast. But we climbed the tower before the lights were scheduled to go out to see what the town looked like in complete darkness.
And when the lights went out—dark it was—no moon, no stars that night. We couldn’t even see our hands in front of us. I never experienced darkness like that night.
We didn’t wait for the lights to come on, so we climbed down the tower ladder, stayed close together, and stumbled our way through the park shrubbery and trees until the lights came on. It was quite an experience.
Most of my clothes in my early years were hand-me-downs from Chet and my cousins Carly and Louie Gambucci (sons of Charlie and Mary). But when I was about 14 years old, I got a surprise of surprises for my birthday.
Mom had purchased a brand new set of pants/shirt for me.

WINTER FUN
In the winter, the swimming holes in the ‘woods’ became ice rinks when not covered by snow. The hills became slopes for skiing and sledding. The city workers would plow off an area of school playgrounds and flood them with water for ice skating and hockey.
They also built sliding boards for winter sledding, which were placed in all the school yards and the park.
During the non-winter seasons, these slides would be stacked in the village storage yard across the alley from Checco’s, where they were still a good source of fun.
Ice Slides
Ice slides were also built in the winter down the side of one of the high ‘dumps’ located in South Hibbing. The only problem with this was that it was about—you guessed it—a one-mile hike from Park Addition.
An iced toboggan slide with edges whizzed us about a full block—what a ride.
It also had a 6-8 foot wide ice slide on which a group of us kids could zip down on a big piece of cardboard.
Some of us even braved going down upright on foot.
The city planners were thoughtful enough to put a little shack on top with a small pot-belly stove, maintained by a hired worker. Great place to thaw out.
The side streets in winter were usually covered with a layer of hard-packed snow, which was good for playing hockey on—without skates.

Driving in the Winter
When I was old enough to drive the car and deliver groceries, I put more miles on the car than Dad did.
I learned how to intentionally spin the car around while turning a corner on the icy streets in the winter—great fun.
I could do this without concern for an accident because there were very few cars around, especially in winter—moving or parked.
I don’t think Dad ever knew that I did this—I know I never told him.
Page 14
Another fun thing was to take my dad’s car with some friends out to a countryside road and pull kids on skis or toboggan. Always had to be on the lookout for those who dropped off. No other cars though.
And about driving cars on country roads—my friend Eugene Baker decided that it would be a good idea to go ice fishing. So he got his dad’s car and away we went to a lake that I don’t to this day know.
There was a lot of snow, but the roads had been plowed.
We chopped a hole in the ice, but no fish, so eventually we left.
When we got about 2 blocks from the lake, he accidentally skidded over the side shoulder and we ended about 20 feet down a sharp slope.
Couldn’t move the car in all the snow, and no civilization in sight for miles.
We were about 20 miles from town.
But our guardian angels were with us—about ½ hour later, a guy came from out of nowhere and with his car was amazingly able to pull us up onto the main snow-crusted road. So home we went OK.

I seem to remember that each winter brought lots of snow—sometimes it seemed to come all in one night.
There were no school days off because of heavy snow—most kids lived within walking distance, and there was little or no means of communication.
Few had telephones or radios to pass on information.
Television didn’t become prominent until the 1950s, so most kids and teachers went to school no matter what.
The Catholic school that I attended from 3rd-8th grade was taught by nuns who lived in their convent right next to the school—so no problem for them to get to school.
But the city plows went into action quickly, and even though I could walk the 10 blocks to school, Dad wanted to make sure I got there OK.
He would have me round up the local kids—public and Catholic school—and hauled us in his vehicle.
We could, of course, trudge back home on our own.

One year, we had so much snow with high winds that the snow drifted very high in several places.
I was able to walk up a drift that was so high against a house that I was able to look into the 2nd story window.
I didn’t think at that time what would have happened if the snow surface had collapsed with me on top.
The front of our store was covered to the top of the store windows.
The Checco house had an outside back stairway with a rail that I used to straddle and slide to the ground tummy side down. A quick way to get from up to down.
I used to wonder if I would ever get a sliver in a very private place, but fortunately, never did.

We didn’t have much in those days, but what we did have, we cherished.
I remember the day my Uncle Cal (Mom’s brother), who worked at that time for the High School athletic department, brought a brand new football for me—he had sneaked it from the school equipment supply.
It had ‘Hibbing High School’ stamped on it, which we sanded off, but I always wondered what would happen if the authorities found out that we had it.
I sure didn’t want Uncle Cal to get into any trouble.
I was very happy to have the ball and considered it mine and mine only.
But whenever the other kids wanted to play football, they came to me to borrow the ball with the threat that if I... (text continues on the next page)
Page 15
I didn’t let them use it, or they would ‘squeal’ to the school authorities. As a consequence, the ball very quickly got to be community property, but I was still the ‘official’ caretaker.
Not many of us had store-bought toys. But we did make things—such as small boats, cars, airplanes, and scooters.
When WWII started, prosperity set in, and then kids were able to frequent the ‘dime’ stores.
We used to make ‘race’ cars out of any wood pieces we could find with old wagon wheels—one rode, one pushed—even had races down 1st Ave which had the ideal slope—not too many real cars frequented that road.
1st Ave was great for winter sledding also. It would carry us for almost 3 blocks—but it was a long haul back.
The scooters we made were like today’s skateboards but with a post handle—roller skate wheels were nailed to the bottom.

We always had fun making and shooting ‘rubber’ guns.
The rubber was like a large rubber band cut from discarded car tire inner tubes, which we got from the car tire and repair shops.
All tires had inner tubes then—no tubeless tires like today.

One of our favorite fun ‘toys’ was an old used car tire.
We used to get them from the same place we got the inner tubes.
It was great fun rolling them up and down the street into each other.
The smallest tires were more maneuverable, but the biggest ones were the most powerful.

We also made ‘sling shots’—a ‘Y’-shaped branch cut from a tree with rubber straps from a car inner tube attached.
We were very critical in the selection of small stones used as bullets.
Some of us got to be quite accurate shooters, but there was one guy who was the ‘unauthorized’ champ at killing the most birds in the park in a single summer season—most were beautiful canaries.
Today—no inner tubes, no sling shots.
Also, they would be too much of a neighborhood hazard.

I remember my first wagon—a small one about 18 inches long.
My mother found it abandoned in an alleyway near my Grandmother’s house.
It didn’t have a handle, but I had great fun riding up/down our Checco apartment hallway—knelt on it with one knee, pumped it with the other foot, and steered it with my hands rubbing on the sides of the front wheels.

There never was a lack of friends to play with.
Playtime was any time I was not sleeping or eating.

One of our summer treats was getting a chunk of ice from the Iceman, who delivered it in a truck.
He would cut a block that was used in people’s ‘ice’ boxes to keep food cool.
I remember him as a mean, tough-looking guy, but he must have been warm on the inside because he always gave each of us a cool treat in the hot summer days.

MY SCHOOLS (Text continues on the next page...)

Page 16
I started Kindergarten in the school located essentially across the street.
This building—later to become our third and last location for the store and apartment—had only 3 rooms.
The front room contained kindergarten and 1st grade, the middle room—2nd grade, and the last room—3rd grade.
I’m sure you all remember this building.
It had no front or side yards.
The school did have a little yard in the back, which was used as the playground.

I started school here—attended kindergarten, 1st and 2nd grade—then attended the Catholic school in South Hibbing about 10 blocks away—3rd to 8th grade, its highest.
Then came High School—9th through 12th.

I attended ‘Junior College’ (1943-44)—as it was called—much the same as current 2-year ‘community’ colleges today.
Although the college wasn’t very large, it was located in the same big High School building—it did have a football and basketball team.
Then came two years at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis, MN.
I graduated with a Bachelor of Aeronautical Engineering Degree in 1947.

College was pretty tough for me, so I didn’t consider an advanced degree.
In all of the previous schooling (K-12), the courses were laid out—little or no big decisions to make.
Counseling was poor or non-existent.
But, in college, I was on my own—sink or swim—do it or drop out.
I never considered dropping out as an option, though many students did drop out.
The engineering courses were pretty tough because I was not a dedicated student.

Graduation in 1947 after 4 years was a huge relief.
But God had a plan for me, so I had to persevere.

MY FIRST PROFESSIONAL JOB
During the last term in college, it was typical for companies to interview students for potential employment.
The McDonnell (St. Louis, MO) and Republic (New York area) aircraft companies, as well as the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), interviewed the aeronautical engineering students.
Both McDonnell and Republic offered jobs, but I accepted McDonnell’s because I did not like the idea of living as far away as New York.
So away I went to St. Louis from Minneapolis by train.
This was a big transition for me, never having been out of Minnesota before.

I was pleasantly surprised to see several of my classmates there too.
But the job was not challenging because it involved the untalented task of heavying up drawings.
These drawings were for the NAVY’s first carrier jet fighter—the original Phantom.
This didn’t seem to have much of a future, so when NACA sent a job offer (several of my classmates got offers also) of employment at Langley Field, VA, at the same pay ($2,500 per year), we accepted.
So my first professional job lasted only 3 months.

I did, however, learn a few things while I was in St. Louis for those 3 months:
✔ Cars were able to zip through downtown at 55-60 mph—on freeways.
 ✔ Public transportation could bring you across town very efficiently.
 ✔ Professional concerts and plays were indeed entertaining.
 ✔ Michelob beer was really pretty good.
Page 17
Big speedboats really did race on rivers.
Summers could be more hot and sweaty than in northern MN.
River flooding (Mississippi) could be devastating.

The move to VA and everything preceding it was, in retrospect, a visible part of God’s plan.
I went to Langley Field not knowing that this was a part of His plan for me to meet Marian, your mother.

CHRISTMAS STORIES
Although we lived at Checco’s for five years, I only remember one Christmas there.
This was during the Great Depression, when very few people had much materially.
But since we had the store, we did eat well.
This particular year—it must have been our first at Checco’s (1930)—Mom and I went Christmas ‘shopping’ downtown—2 blocks away.
The shopping involved ‘looking’ only because money was in short supply for most, and we came home with nothing—I thought.
We saw a lot of things that I liked, but Mom settled on a small box of blocks (about 6x8x1 inch).
I thought that she had bought the box, but she told me she didn’t and that she would tell Santa to bring them.
I wasn’t sure about this, but I knew that I had to be on the lookout for them on Christmas morning.

Rita and Chet were old enough to realize that there wasn’t much money available then, so they told Mom to get me a present at least, so as not to disappoint me.
They would be able to get along without.
Mom told me this in later years.

When Christmas morning came, I dashed out to see my ‘presents’ from Santa—I thought that I had been a pretty good boy.
The only thing under the tree was the red cloth spread around the tree base.
My heart dropped.
My initial thought was that Santa must have missed this house.
But upon closer inspection, I found the box of blocks hidden in a fold in the cloth, just as Mom had said it would be.
One gift—but it was one of my most memorable Christmases ever.
To top that off, Santa had left a bag of Christmas candy in the kitchen cabinet for the whole family as well—the kind that Dad sold in the store—a double surprise.

In later years, when Chet was working at Lockheed in Los Angeles, he sent home a lot of money for us to buy Christmas gifts.
I was in High School at that time.
Part of this money was to go for a bike for me, which would be my very first.
Rita had arranged to buy it, and she hauled it up the stairs into our living room without my knowledge.
I couldn’t believe my eyes when I came into the room at Rita’s urging to see this beautiful red bike near the Christmas tree.
What a surprise.
I believe it cost about $25, which was a lot of money at that time.
I eventually sold it for the same price when I went off to college in Minneapolis a few years later.
Inflation had set in.

GOD’S PLAN FOR ME - THE CONNECTIONS
The move to Virginia and everything preceding it was, in retrospect, a visible part of God’s plan for my life.
I went to Langley Field not knowing that I would meet my…
––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Page 18
future wife, Marian, your mother. Following are just some of the connections that are specifically tied together. Without any of them and their timeliness I very likely would not have ended up marrying Marian, and you know the consequence of that.
Nono/Nona left Italy to come to America. If they hadn’t come to this country exactly when they did, then there wouldn’t have been any of us.
Dad left Italy and came to Hibbing. If he hadn’t roomed/boarded in Nono’s house he wouldn’t have met Mom.
Mom’s family left Michigan to settle in Hibbing. My family moved to Park Addition. If we hadn’t moved there – again no further connections. ––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Page 19
I received a model airplane in grade school as a Christmas gift. This was the start of my interest in aircraft which eventually led to Aeronautical Engineering and Langley Field in Virginia.
Rita met and married Mike Bobich who continually impressed me about the importance of a college education degree. Quite a degree in aeronautical engineering wouldn’t have made it to Virginia.
Ardan Piantoni was instrumental in getting me a job in the mines. This job during college vacations provided the necessary finances for college. No college – no job in Virginia.
Junior College commenced Aero Engineering course of study because of my new hobby/vision. When I proved I had some capability (I never believed I had any real capabilities) I was sent off to a university. If no Junior College was located in town I wouldn’t have gotten started. Then, if no scholarship was awarded to get me into the big school, that would have ended it all. So much tied in. No engineering – no job in Virginia – no life for you, in your current person.
Paul Ebb – Jack Isaacson – helped me much. Borrowed and lent – encouraging words. Without their help I might have flunked out of Junior College.
I was interviewed at college, by McDonnell, Republic and the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (later re-named NASA). I interviewed for the position of Langley Field, in the area I wanted, with the same group for whom NACA at Langley Field, VA did the X-1 and the “A” series rockets. I was excited to be accepted by them. That was in the winter of 1949-1950. Not too many years before that time that group had Chuck Yeager break the sound barrier. With your Mom’s urging to complete a degree, and with her help, I was able to graduate in June 1950. I started work in Virginia the next month. And so it goes on…
And so it goes on – many events, great memories – a great life. There’s no doubt that the hand of God’s plan is in it all. I only hope I measured up to the plan – or at least the plan forgives me when I didn’t. And I hope ultimately that you and yours feel that you’re part of the making – God’s plan – it sure looks like you’re a big part of it.
I’m sure that each of you have a series of your own personal connections that helped shape your lives.
Page 20
The rest of my life has, obviously, been with your Mom (60 years) and family. She has covered most of that in her life’s history.
MY DAD’S CARS
1920s or earlier Dodge touring 4 door sedan, used more as a neighborhood free taxi
 1920s Rio pickup truck used to deliver coal by Dad and transported neighborhood folks to pick berries
 1920s Oakland sedan – hardly ever used because of mechanical problems
 1928 Ford 2 door coupe – I learned to drive in this one
 1930 or so Dodge coupe – “my” car
 1950 Mercury 2 door coupe – Chet was driving this car to college with others – truck ran him off road – rolled over – luckily no one hurt – car totaled
 1958 Ford 2 door coupe – last one
All cars were used for grocery delivery, except the Dodge. This one was before the store.
MY MOM’S LETTER OF AUGUST 8, 1970
During the time we were living in Pennsylvania I had asked my Mom to write a little of her life growing up as she remembered it. She responded with a letter to me which is here included. It’s in her own handwriting so it may be difficult to read or follow. I typed it up for clarity. The following is the word-for-word letter from August 8, 1970.
August 8, 1970
I had an angel Mother and Father. In about 1901 they immigrated from Northern Italy. They landed in New York, went to the northern part of Minnesota, to Tower or Iron Mountain, I am not sure, to find work in the mines or at a sawmill.
They made their home in Biwabik, Minnesota and it was my family being Catholic. We had to go to church in the next town, Gilbert, on Sunday. My mother was timid about my Dad being away from home and used to get nervous with the children alone. Dad was working in the mines. Then they found a small Catholic Church in Biwabik. Our whole family walked to mass, and we walked home. When my brother was confirmed, he said the entire Holy Rosary in Latin, without missing a word. This was done by the entire family (as the days came every 4 to 5 years). When I was already 14 years old, my sister (Mary)...

21
was 13 and I was 10. Under these circumstances the Bishop confirmed me too. Usually the classes were accepted from 12 on. So Dad went back to his work in Minnesota quite disappointed, but he understood. So we had to wait until the following year. We were confirmed about June 1913. Everything was ready packed and we left for Hibbing.
One week later on June 21, 1903, we arrived. We took the train and I remember how I enjoyed the trip. I always remember a pretty little fall of water on the way. The route was longer than now. The distance was more or less than 500 from the border of upper Michigan, Wisconsin, etc., and Duluth. We arrived at the train station in Hibbing, which was in the center of town. There was no bus station, no bus line, no station which still stands in any way. We were met by a truck from Dad’s friend. We had to go through tall timbers, some farms, a wooden bridge, and past many out-of-the-way places. At last we came to what was to be our home and rooming house at 307 1st Ave. N. in 1925. John (my son) were born – 2 years later.
We all had separate rooms, a large front room, a living room, dining room, large hall. I recall maybe the living room might have been a dining room, or maybe a parlor. There was a kitchen, a big porch, and a cellar or utility room on a back porch.
We lived there and had about 20 or 30 boarders. A place also to sleep for them. Every time I think how we managed to get enough living quarters to carry on work for all these labor men is a wonder. I guess we had enough rooms, a large basement, a huge attic or some place we made up cots for them.
We used to get up very early – 4:00 or 5:00 a.m. to fix the lunches and start the big breakfasts, and some men would come in from the night shift to eat. Mother did the cooking and Dad helped. We children had to go out at 5 A.M. to stand on the corners to call out “boarders” (a word in Italian). The men would come from the night shift. We did not have a phone then. Dad was busy and mother did the rest, and the children got in the way I suppose. Our Uncle John lived with us. He was single. He was a very fine person. My mother’s younger brother. He always tried to amuse us or to help us. He had a saloon on 1st Ave. – it is now an old building, but it was new then. We used to go there for soda pop or pickles or crackers.
Then Daddy went to be a soldier in Italy. He was away three years – 1910 to 1913 and came home again on April 20, 1914.
Our sister, Francesca, was born on May 21, 1915. She lived only one month. The second one, a brother, was born April 11, 1917, but also died. Then Chester
Page 22
came in 1919, March 15 - Rita on August 4, 1921 - and John, on June 14, 1925. And God gave us three of the nicest kids ever.
From here on I guess you know the rest. May God bless you all and your families with happiness and good health.
We love you all.
Mother and Dad
In addition to the above letter, there are two audio tapes which contain more information about my Mom's early life. These were made on October 1981 when I was in Hibbing. Copies of these can be made if you would like to hear them. Mom was 88 years old then and still quite spry.
A series of photographs are included in the back of this book that you might find interesting.
Page 23
23
FAMILY IDENTIFICATION - TOMASSONI
Grandfather - Biagio Tomassoni
 Grandmother - Francesca Gambucci
 Their Children
Luigi (Pio)
Joseph (Jo-Jo) my Father (1893-1975)
Teresa
Viola (?) never left Italy
 All but Viola lived and died in Hibbing MN
Luigi married Marrietta Gambucci
 Laura
 Flora
 Irene
 Santana (Lucille) married Mario
 ???
Paolo married Serafina Pambianco
 Elena (Biagio)
 Fernando (Nando)
Biagio married Josephine Sabatini
Filomena died in infancy (1915)
Chester (Jo-Jo) died in infancy (1916)
Biagio (1921)
Irena (1921 - ?)
Rosa
Joseph married Bruno Costantini
Armand (Tony)
John
Valeria married Cardino Marella (remained in Italy)
 Children - unknown
Page 24
FAMILY IDENTIFICATION - SABBATINI
Grandfather - Ubaldo Sabbatini (1856 - 1934)
 Grandmother - Sperandia Nardi (1864 - 1944)
 Their Children (1899 - 1984)
 Edward (1899 - 1984)
 Mary
 Josephine - my mother (1893 - 1989)
 Louis
 Calvin (?)
 Johnny (died at 7 years) (1903 - 1910)
 Orville (Billy)
Edward married Hilda Jackson
 Bernice (died at about 16 years)
 Edwardina
 Edward Jr
 Cal Jr
Mary married Charlie Gambucci
 Louis
 Carolyn
Josephine married Guido Tomassoni
 Pierres - died in infancy (1915)
 Chester - died in infancy (1916)
 Biagio (1921 - ?)
 Irena (1921 - ?)
 Rita (1919 - ?)
 John (1925 - ?)
Louis married Angelina Bonenverti
 Tony
 Nick
Cal married Celia Minachich
 Cal Jr
Orville never married
 Billy married, but no direct offspring



ART
25
THE STORY OF JOHN AND MARIAN TOMASSONI
My name is Marian Therese Primavera Tomassoni. I am the wife of John Edward Tomassoni. I plan to tell the story of John's and my heritage and our lives before we married, and some of the major events of our lives together. I hope that this will be of some interest to our children, grandchildren and those future generations of Tomassoni's live after we have departed to be with the Lord.
JOSEPH AND PASQUALINA SCIULLI
I will begin with my maternal grandparents, Joseph Sciulli and his second wife, Pasqualina Apollari. Joseph's father, Francesco, was raised in an orphanage in Calabria, Italy. He was named Francesco Giuseppi Sciulli. He married a woman from Calabria, Carolina, and they had three children, one of whom was my grandfather, Giuseppi (Joseph), born in the 1860's. Joseph's first wife, Angelina, gave birth to a son, Francesco. Later, Angelina died giving birth to a second child who also died soon after. Having no one to care for Francesco (Frank), he inquired in the village to see if any woman would like to marry him. Pasqualina Apollaro worked in the town as a seamstress. She had already noticed this handsome widower and was very happy to marry him and raise his son. She soon gave birth to Carolina and Henrietta, my mother, who was born in 1908. Joseph earned his living by delivering mail with a horse and carriage.
In 1910, Joseph came to the United States seeking a better life for his family. He worked very hard chopping down trees in New Jersey. As soon as he saved enough money for passage, he sent for his family. Pasqualina crossed the ocean with her three children, Francisco (9), Carolina (7) and my mother, Henrietta (5). When they arrived at Ellis Island, New York, they had to show that they were all healthy. Carolina had some sort of an eye infection and they would not allow her to enter the States. They wanted to send her back to Italy, but the man who had brought them to the ship in Italy had gone back to his village. Pasqualina didn't know what to do. Somehow they were finally allowed to enter the United States. The children hadn't seen their father for 2 years and Caroline didn't like the looks of the man who came to pick them up. He was very dark from working outdoors all the time. She thought "I hope he's not my father". But he was! They took the train to Philadelphia and had to live for awhile in two rooms in the house of a friend. The children were enrolled in Catholic school and were soon speaking English. Life was difficult during those years, but Pasqualina continued to reproduce and had six other children. These were Santo (Sandy), Natalia (Dollie), Nicolo (Nickie), Adamo (Adam), Eugenio (Gene), and Emilio (Emil). At the time of this writing, (2001) only Gene is still living (age 83).
HENRIETTA SCIULLI PRIMAVERA
My mother, Henrietta, was quite active as a child and was always doing things to aggravate Pasqualina, who would scold Caroline for not watching her little sister. Once mother grabbed hold of a wheel of a horse-drawn wagon and said "giddiup". The horse took off and she went spinning round and round holding on to the wheel. She also told a story about wandering off one day and getting lost when she was about five. Someone took her to the police station where she spent most of the night in a cell with some prostitutes until the police were able to contact her father.
25
PAge 26

26
Mother left school at age 14 to help support her large family. Since she only finished sixth grade, she was required by law to attend continuation school in the evenings. She worked at several menial jobs, one of which was in a hat factory. At that time, women wore hats decorated with different kinds and colors of bird feathers. Mother would arrange the feathers in different ways and glue them onto hats. She probably earned about 15 cents an hour which she had to give to her mother. She also worked in an ice cream plant and once told me how sick she became from eating frozen strawberries all day. Mother was very pretty and admitted to being a bit of a flirt. When she was 17, the man who was to become my father saw her on a trolley car and was smitten. He said to his friend "See that girl! I'm going to marry her some day." Two years later, he did!
THE PRIMAVERA FAMILY
My father's father's name was Emanuel Primavera. He was born in Italy in 1861. His mother's name was Concetta Masciantoni and his father's name was Alessandro. He came to the United States in the late 1890's with his wife, Marianna nee Tursi. He married Marianna when he was 30 and she was only 15. Apparently he was supposed to marry Marianna's widowed mother. But she changed her mind and asked him to marry her daughter instead. Emanuel had started a soft drink bottling company from the basement of his home in South Philadelphia. A flavor he made was called "gazazza" which was similar to our ginger ale. Once he was approached by men who showed him a formula for a certain beverage. He was asked if he would make it. He refused, saying it was too much like his gazazza. So they approached the man who used to do the bottle washing for Emanuel at his store. The man became wealthy with the formula "7-UP'.
Marianna worked many hours in their business when she wasn't caring for the family. She had 17 pregnancies, although some were miscarriages and some died at birth or soon after. She died when she was 37, leaving only four children that eventually reached maturity. They were Luigi (Louis), Adelina (Dillie), Alessandro (Alex) my father, and Giovanni (John). They are all deceased now, but I have several cousins living in New Jersey that I haven't seen in many years.
Emanuel was a lover of the arts and knew works of many famous artists and musicians. He had a piano in his bedroom and an organ in the living room which he played with no musical instruction. He often went to the opera. He also loved to paint and painted some of the walls in his home with flowers and murals. I received some of this information from Aunt Helen, my father's step-sister. I was only years old when Grandpop Emanuel died but I remember that he was a big man with reddish hair and lots of mustache.
Grandpop died when he was 74. I remember being at his wake. In those days the deceased were laid out in their homes. The coffin was placed in the living room and all the neighbors, relatives and friends sat around crying, talking and eating. Then the next morning the hearse would bring the coffin to the church. Or if the church was close enough, the coffin would be carried by pallbears, followed by cars laden down with all the flowers people sent. The people would walk behind or follow in cars. The women relatives would all wear black with black veils covering their faces just like we see now in old movies. I liked funerals when I was young. There was lots of crying and lots of food.


Page 27
My father, Alex, was born in 1903 and was only 9 years old when Marianna died. There were five children at the time and Marianna's mother came to live with them. But they were too much for her and after 3 years as a widower, Emanuel married Annie. He was 55 and she was 38 at the time, and after 10 months, a daughter, Helen was born. Annie was a good mother to Emanuel's children and they all loved her. I never knew my true grandmother, so Annie became Grandmom Annie to me. She was very proud of her good figure which she kept even until she died in her late eighties.
My father's step-sister, Helen, was about 13 when I was born and I loved to visit her. I thought she was so pretty and she paid lots of attention to me. She and her husband, Frank, are still alive. They live in New Jersey and are in their eighties at the time of this writing. I call her once in awhile and always enjoy our talks. She is always so upbeat and cheerful even though she is concerned about Uncle Frank who has a bad heart now. When I was a teenager we lived just a block from their home. I always enjoyed being in their company. Uncle Frank was in the home building and remodeling business but he also had a wonderful talent as a sculptor. While in the Navy in World War II, he taught classes in sculpting to recuperating sailors.
When I was little and living in South Philadelphia, my parents often took me to visit my both married and lived in New father's brother, Johnny, and sister, Dillie, who were Jersey. Uncle Lou and his wife, Aunt Frances, lived near us and Aunt Frances made it possible for me to take elocution classes, dancing and piano lessons with my cousin Doris. I will always appreciate the opportunities she gave me.
ALEX PRIMAVERA
My father Alex was born in 1903. He worked in the family business delivering soft drinks in a horse-drawn wagon when he was very young and often missed school for days at a time. The nuns would punish him severely when he went back to class. He left school after the fourth grade but learned to read and write and was pretty good in arithmetic. When he was a teenager, he became an apprentice cement finisher and he was later admitted into the cement finisher's union. He took great pride in his work and always did more than his share on a job. He worked with a certain type of composition flooring that was used on ships. He often had to travel to shipyards located along the east coast. He was too young to be drafted during the first world war and was soon earning good money, much of which he gambled at cards when he was in town.
One morning, dad saw my mother on a trolley car. He was so attracted to her that he got off the car when she did. She became frightened when she realized he was following her. She dashed out into the street to hurry away from him and he grabbed her arm to save her from being run down. They began to talk and before she knew it she was "keeping company".
HENRIETTA AND ALEX
Courtship for Henrietta and Alex was not easy. At first she met him without her parents knowing about it. Then he came to her home and asked if he could visit once a week. They had to sit in the parlor with someone else present. They were engaged, but since Caroline was the older sister, it was customary for her to marry first. Not wanting to delay
PAge 27

28
mother's marriage, Caroline accepted a proposal from John Porto even though she didn't really love him as much as she should have. They were married in August 1927, and mother began to make plans for her wedding.
Henrietta married Alex in St. Nicholas Church on September 21, 1927. Henrietta was 19 and Alex was almost 24. They rented an apartment a few blocks from her parents' home. Henrietta didn't like it when Alex had to work out of town, but she wasn't lonely for long. Sixteen months after their marriage, they had their first child. Me! There is more to tell about my parents, but I'll tell more about them as I continue with my life.
MARIAN THERESE PRIMAVERA
I was born January 7th, 1929. My father insisted that I be born in a hospital even though most babies at the time were delivered in the home by a midwife. It was a good decision because mother was in labor for a couple of days. I was finally delivered with the help of forceps and anesthesia. I weighed 8 pounds 2 ounces and was named Marian after my father's mother, Marianna. I was the first grandchild in my mother's large family and I received lots of attention from my eight aunts and uncles. In 1931, when I was 2, my father bought a 3-story home on 15th street. The house was about 50 years old and had once been a very fine house. We had a coal furnace in the "cellar" which was difficult for my mother in winter when my father was working out of town. The fire would go out and she had a hard time lighting it again. The coal truck man would come to put coal into our coal bin through a chute in our basement window. Ashes had to be put outside for pickup every week.
Mother washed her clothes on a washboard in the bathtub and we had to light a gas burner in the basement every time we needed hot water for washing clothes or taking a bath. We boiled a pot of water on the stove for washing dishes. Refrigerators had not yet become popular. We had an ice box in the kitchen and in the summer an iceman would come around the back alley every day with an ice block that cost about fifteen cents. In winter we had a galvanized metal box which hung outside the kitchen window to keep the milk, eggs and butter cold. Usually, we bought food just for the day at neighborhood stores, the dry grocer, the butcher, and the fresh produce store (which sold fish on Friday for Catholics). We stood at the counter, waited in line and then asked for one item at a time while the owner of the store went around gathering the items. I remember the first time we went to a "super market" which had just opened about a mile from our home. We weren't used to going around with a cart and selecting our own food and then going through a check-out counter. What an adventure! But my father didn't like to buy meat already in a package. He said it didn't taste as fresh as having the butcher cut it from the animal hanging in his cold storage box.
THE GREAT DEPRESSION
In the early thirties the great depression began and soon things got very hard financially for the country as well as for my parents. We rented out the third floor of our house and the second floor back bedroom in order to get money for food because Dad was unemployed most of the time. He got a job with a work force digging the tunnel for the subway train. It was wet, cold, back-breaking work and he only earned a dollar a day. Dad's father, Emanuel, died in March 1934 and Dad got quite depressed about everything.
28

29
My mother was pregnant again and gave birth to my brother, Robert Emanuel, in June 1934. Dad began to have chest pains and lower back problems and we finally had to accept welfare, which was a terrible blow to Dad's pride. Italian men didn't easily accept "charity".
I started public school in 1934. I was unaware of the economic problems because everyone I knew lived as we did. I had a warm house, food to eat and a few clothes to wear, which were either sewed by my mother or handed down from my cousin Doris. I had few playthings but I was content with my jump rope, a set of jacks and my paper dolls. I had a pair of clamp-on roller skates and a used tricycle. I seemed to remember playing with a Shirley Temple doll but I'm not sure if it was mine or one that some visitor's child brought one day. Reading books was my favorite pastime and the public library was nearby. My mother gave me a penny a day to buy a soft pretzel during recess. I shared it with two of my friends when they didn't have the money to buy one, but I gave them the ends and kept the twisted middle part for myself. I did well in school and skipped part of the third grade.
My family often walked the mile or so to Pierce Street where my mother's parents lived. The street was very narrow, almost like an alley, and since there were few cars then, the children always played in the street. We played crack the whip on roller skates. The person on the end would really go flying. When the weather was nice, a man would come around with a little cart and for three cents you could buy a waffle ice cream sandwich, or a frozen banana on a stick dipped in chocolate. The best treat in summer was Mr. Canulli's Italian lemon ice. He would hand-turn the crank of a barrel filled with sugar, lots of lemons and ice. I think this was the best thing I ever tasted. He sold a penny size and a five cent size. He would round off the top of the paper cup and if I had five cents I would go back to buy a penny size five times because I thought I got more that way.
An enjoyable event in my young life was going to the Wildwood, New Jersey seashore with my Grandmother Pasqualina. She loved the ocean and Grandpop Joe tried to save enough money each year to pay the $25 rent for the week. Sunblock wasn't invented yet and I'd usually get too much sun the first day. Grandmom would put a cloth soaked in vinegar on my back and it felt so good.
President Roosevelt's New Deal plan appeared to be helping the country and in the late thirties the economic situation began to improve and my Dad started to work again. He had a job in a Massachusetts shipyard and the family spent the summer of 1940 there. We came home with another baby on the way.
In the fall, we sold our 15th Street home and put a contract on a house to be built in West Philadelphia. It cost $5,100 and the mortgage rate was only 2.5%. Construction was supposed to be completed in six months, but work stopped because permits for water and sewer lines were being held up for some reason. In the meantime, my grandmother Pasqualina became very ill and she died in March 1941 when she was only 56. My brother William was born on March 26th, two weeks after Grandmom's death. My mother took the death very hard and cried for months. At that time Italian women were required to wear all black clothing for a whole year when a very close relative died and Mother complied with the tradition. Since we had already sold our house and had to leave before the new one was completed, we moved temporarily to my Grandfather's house. My
29

30
mother assumed the responsibilities of taking care of Grandpop and her younger unmarried brothers, Eugene and Emil. The small row house was crowded with 5 adults and 3 children. A neighbor invited me to sleep in her house with her daughter who was my age. We lived like this for about 6 months. Our new home was finally finished and we moved into it in October 1941.
WORLD WAR II
The Japanese attacked our Naval Base on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii on December 7, 1941. President Roosevelt then declared war on Japan and the next 5 years were very different and very difficult for many families whose sons were drafted into the armed services. We also got involved in the war in Europe, where Adolph Hitler was trying to conquer the whole continent. Our economy did get a boost from the war effort, however, and my father began to work steadily at a shipyard in Chester, PA. He came home every night and we finally seemed to have a normal home life. Work was plentiful for those who were weren't drafted and although we needed rationing stamps issued by the government in order to buy many items like sugar, meat, butter, and shoes, we were not deprived. Four of my uncles were in the service, but they all came home uninjured. Many families lost loved ones as thousands were killed both in Europe and in the islands of the Pacific fighting the Japanese. The war ended in 1945.
MY LIFE AS A TEENAGER
When we moved to West Philadelphia, my parents didn't want me to walk the mile and a half to the junior high school so they insisted that attend the local parochial school for 8th grade. I didn't like it at all. The school only went up to the 8th grade. I took an exam given by the Sisters of Mercy Academy and won a half scholarship so I went there for 9th grade. But I was unhappy and really didn't like the somber structure of parochial school. My parents finally relented and I was allowed to attend Overbrook Public High School. Because of my good grades, I was placed in an accelerated achievement class, which was a new concept in those days. I remember being very honored to play the part of the Virgin Mary in a Christmas tableau. There was no problem then with separation of church and state. We had bible reading every morning and even sang Christmas carols.
My biggest conflict with my parents started when I was in high school. I liked a boy who was very good to me. He worked after school and had money to take me to the movies, ice skating, riding, etc. But my parents were very upset. They liked him all right, but not for me. He wasn't Catholic, he wasn't an Italian, but he was Jewish. They weren't prejudiced against Jewish people. They just believed that young people should only date those of their own ethnic and religious background. Actually, they hardly ever liked any boys that came to pick me up for a date. We'd argue about why I couldn't go out with whomever I wanted. I couldn't understand their viewpoint until I became a parent myself. I graduated high school in January 1946, the month I was 17. I wanted to go to college, but it was out of the question as far as my father was concerned. We didn't have the money, but he was also concerned that I wouldn't find a husband that liked a "smart" woman. In those days most young people got a job right out of high school and started to contribute money to the household expenses. College was for the wealthy and for the Jewish parents who made sacrifices to see that their children were educated.
30

31
This changed when the war was over as returning servicemen were able to attend college with Government funds. I had to look for a job but really wasn't qualified for much. A salesperson's job didn't appeal to me at all as I had tried that during a few Christmas holiday seasons. I certainly didn't want to be a waitress. I knew how to type (even though I had my own system) because my Aunt Caroline had given me a used manual (non- electric) typewriter on my 10th birthday. After discussing my options with the high school guidance counselor I was sent to the American Red Cross. So my first job was typing addresses on envelopes during the 1946 Spring campaign for $20 a week. When the campaign was over, I answered a newspaper ad for a typist wanted by Dun and I was hired to type reports for insurance companies Bradstreet, a credit checking firm. who wanted to know whether businesses applying for fire insurance had had any previous fires.
I used a non-electric typewriter that was not self- correcting. Every error had to be erased neatly. Since we had no copy machines then, in order to make copies of typed pages, sheets of carbon paper had to be inserted between each page. Typing errors had to be erased as well as all the carbon copies. Sometimes there would be 10 sheets - paper, carbon, paper, carbon, etc. The carbon copies at the end were never very readable.
I was required to type a certain number of reports every day. My supervisor always gave me the long ones and she and her friend took the short ones so I always had less done than they did. I was the new employee at 17 years old. I was paid $25 a week. The job was boring and I wasn't learning anything. I was sick of that job in 6 months, so I answered another help-wanted ad from a furniture store nearby. I went for an interview during lunchtime. I was offered $30 salary a week, so I gave my notice when I got back from lunch. Bandler's was a small furniture store located at 6th and Market Streets. The salesmen were pleasant and would bring us coffee and donuts in the morning. The office work was divided among two other ladies and myself and they were very helpful, teaching me how to use the cash register machine which also kept records of charge accounts. I assisted the bookkeeper and learned how to balance the books. I worked there for a year and a half. I started dating a good looking salesman (Jewish again) who would take me to the movies every Monday night when we had to work until 9 p.m.
A couple of years later when I was 19 years old my father came home from work with exciting news. His boss offered him at least a year's work at the shipyard in Newport News, VA. He was to work installing floors in the USS United States, a huge passenger liner. Dad agreed to go only if he could take his family. That was wonderful news for me because I was ready for a big change in my life.
MOVING TO VIRGINIA - 1948
Dad had to start work soon so he left for Virginia and we put our house for sale. The war had caused real estate prices to rise so we were able to sell our house for $12,500, $7,000, more than we had paid seven years before. Dad found a furnished apartment for us in Hampton, VA, so we sold some furniture and put the rest in storage. Dad came home every other weekend. We planned to move when the school term was over in June. My mother was not happy about moving so far away from her family and she spent a lot of time visiting family and friends and tearfully saying goodbye.
31

32
Mother wasn't much of a planner. I was 19 at the time and was able to assume the responsibility of planning this move. Many decisions had to be made - what to store, what to give away, what to sell, what to take with us, what to pack and what to wait
until the last minute to take with us.
Soon moving day came. Three hundred and twenty miles was a long distance in those days and we didn't even have a car. But Aunt Frances and Uncle Lou offered to drive us in their car and Aunt Dollie and Uncle Angelo said they would drive our belongings in their pickup truck. We were only going to take kitchenware, our clothes, linens, one single bed, Bob's bike and my piano. We loaded up and started off the morning of June 8, 1948. There were no beltways or divided highways to Virginia in those days. We had to drive through all the cities including down town Baltimore. It took 12 hours to drive the 320 miles but we finally arrived.
The apartment was a great disappointment to my mother. Dad had only seen it at night. It had a kitchen, living room, two bedrooms and a bathroom. The maple furniture cushions were faded and greasy, the mattresses were hard and lumpy, and the kitchen was very small with an old refrigerator and gas range which had to be lit with a match. The apartment certainly had no air conditioner, dishwasher, garbage disposal, hot water heater, automatic furnace, etc. (Very few apartments had any of these features in the forties.) Bob, Bill and I were to share the larger bedroom so we could squeeze in the extra single bed we brought for me. Laundry was a big problem for my mother. She was always washing clothes at home and now found that she had to walk with her dirty clothes about three blocks to the launderette. She had to carry the wet clothes home and hang them outside on the clothesline. It wasn't too long before we sent for our wringer washer from storage. I really don't remember what we she did when it rained. In Philadelphia we had clothes lines in the basement when the weather was bad.
My mother missed her family and cried a lot. But I was very happy and looked forward to a new adventure. I helped my mother as much as I could to settle in. Then one day I took the bus to Langley Field to look for a job. Because of my bookkeeping experience, I was employed by the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) as a payroll clerk for $1900 a year. This Federal Agency's name was later changed to the National Aeronautics and Space Agency (NASA). I soon got into a carpool, made some friends and started dating Ray, who was good looking and lots of fun. We would go dancing on Saturday nights. But I was still very lonely. I guess I was reaching the period in my life when I wanted someone special and I knew Ray wasn't he.
I have always believed in God. I remember saying my prayers at night starting from when I was about five years old. I'd pray that my baby brother (Bobbie) would stop crying so that I could go to sleep. However, I didn't think about whether or not God really heard me, or if so, whether He would answer my prayers. Praying was just something I was supposed to do. I received the sacraments of baptism as an infant, holy communion and confirmation when I was seven. I went to mass on Sundays and holy days to fulfill the obligation required by my Catholic faith, but I never felt a close relationship to Jesus. I tried to stay awake at night in order to say the memorized traditional prayers but I never really talked to God. I tried to fulfill my responsibilities and do what was expected of me, but I was so lonely most of the time and not very happy. I escaped to my world of books and enjoyed
32
33

33
the lives of the people in those pages. But Jesus loved me then even though I didn't know it, and he was planning something special for me. My life changed in March 1949.
MY PRAYER
It was the beginning of Lent and I decided to attend noon mass at the base chapel. I was 20 years old and was disappointed that I had not yet found the love of my life. I knelt at the altar before mass and asked God for a very special favor. I said that I felt I was ready to meet a man that would be a good husband to me and good father to the children I wanted to have. I promised God that if He would send me the right man, I would do my best to be a good wife and mother. But God was waiting for me to do something first. One Monday evening in early March I called Ray to break the standing date we had for the following Saturday night and I asked him not to call me any more. I knew that I had to break off any relationships that were not from God if I wanted my prayers answered. Shortly after hanging up the phone, it rang.
THE TELEPHONE CALL
Hello! I heard a beautiful male voice saying "Hello, my name is John Tomassoni. I heard about you from a co-worker of mine. I'm calling to ask you to attend an open house party with me this coming Saturday evening." A neighbor of ours had already mentioned this John Tomassoni to me, saying she was going to introduce this great guy to me some day. Since I had already broken the date with Ray, I was free on Saturday, so I accepted.
OUR FIRST DATE - MARCH 12, 1949
I was a little nervous when Saturday night came. I hoped he would like how I looked. I wore a pretty silvery grey dress. (I still have the gold earrings I wore for the occasion). John arrived on time with a box of candy. He looked so handsome with such a nice smile and such beautiful dark hair. I introduced him to my family.
When I went into the kitchen to say goodnight to my father he said "Now that's what I call a man". That was the first time Dad ever said something nice about anybody that I dated. Johnny was a little shy at first. He didn't own a car so we were driven by another couple. We had a lovely evening dancing and getting to know each other. He told me all about his family in Hibbing, Minnesota. He graduated from the University of Minnesota in 1947 as an aeronautical engineer. John's first job as an engineer was with McDonald Aircraft in St. Louis, Missouri, but a few months later, he accepted an offer from the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) a Federal agency at Langley Field, Virginia. He shared an apartment two blocks away from our house with two other boys from Minnesota that he knew from college - George Pratt and Dean Lindquist. George later became the best man at our wedding and we still keep in touch. Dean passed away from a heart attack on the golf course when he was only about 50. Well, back to our first date.
John was very polite and quiet spoken and seemed to be having a nice time. Afterwards he took me to my door and said something about enjoying the evening. Then he smiled, shook my hand and left. For over two weeks I didn't hear from him. I began to believe that he was just being polite and that he didn't really enjoy the evening with me. One day I accidentally met him at the grocery store. We stood on the corner and talked for a long
33



33

34
time. A few days later he called to say that his roommates were preparing dinner for some friends and asked if I would like to join them. I accepted and from that night I never accepted a date from any other man.
We began to see each other almost every night. I got to know what a fine person he was, and I knew that he was the one I wanted for my husband, but he seemed unable to express his feelings for me. I think he was a bit frightened of this new thing that was happening in his life and hesitated to take the big step into marriage.
Finally, after six months of steady dating, I thought that if he didn't know whether he loved me by this time he never would. One Sunday afternoon I said to Johnny that I didn't want to fall more deeply in love with him and get hurt, so I didn't want to see him any more. He looked a little surprised but said goodbye and left.
THE MARRIAGE PROPOSAL POEM
We used to see each other each morning at the corner where our car pools picked us up. I waited until the last minute to leave but Johnny was waiting there for me. As I got into my car he handed me an envelope. I couldn't believe my eyes when I read the words on the scrap of paper inside. It was a two-lined rhymed poem that ended "Marian, my darling, my love, my all - will you marry me before next fall?" I screamed "Johnny's asked me to marry him". He asked my father for my hand in marriage the following week and we became engaged on November 26, 1949.
THE TRIP TO MINNESOTA
We made plans to go to Minnesota at Christmas so John could introduce me to his family. We drove straight through to Minneapolis with his roommate, George Pratt. We stayed the night at the YWCA and YMCA (no staying in a room together in those days). We took the bus the next day for the 200 mile ride to Hibbing. When we arrived, we had to walk a couple of blocks to his home. It was 17 degrees below zero and the hairs in my nose froze. I was never so cold in my life, but Johnny's parents welcomed me with open arms and I was content. I met his sister, Rita, her husband Mike Bobich, and their children, Patti (5) and Tommy (2). On Christmas Eve we drove to Bemidji, about 100 miles away, to visit his brother, Chet, his wife Helen, and their two children, Johnny and Dickie. We were the only ones on the icy roads and there was very little heat in the car. I was so cold. We were blessed that the car didn't break down or we would have frozen to death.
I met lots of other relatives who all insisted that I taste their homemade wine. Because of the wine that we drank at each of the homes we visited, I didn't feel the cold at all when we went to the observation tower to look at the open pit iron mine that Hibbing was known for. I was going to tell a little about John's family but I think I will leave that for him to do.
OUR WEDDING PLANS
We returned from Minnesota and after the first of the year of 1950 we began making plans for our wedding. Catholic marriages weren't permitted during Lent, so we set the date for two weeks after Easter. I I purchased my wedding dress for $130 which was a lot of money
34

35
considering that my parents gave me $500 to pay for the whole wedding. We were to be married at Saturday mass at St. Mary, Star of the Sea church in Fort Monroe.
Another wedding party had already arranged for altar flowers, so we were spared that expense. My cousin Doris came from Philadelphia to be my maid of honor. My 8-year old little neighbor was my flower girl. John's roommate, George Pratt, was the best man, and my brother, Bob and his friend, Ney (Ignatio), agreed to serve as ushers. We invited friends from work and family from Philadelphia to attend our wedding. John's parents came from Minnesota. We planned a breakfast after mass for 75 people at the Chamberlain Hotel across the street from the church. We paid $1.75 per person for the breakfast (expensive in those days) and $25 extra for the cake. I had $200 left from my $500 budget.
We rented a one-bedroom apartment a block from where my parents lived for $50 a month and we began to furnish it. We purchased a bedroom set and a sofabed and rocker for the living room, where I also put my piano and cedar chest. John's parents gave us money for a kitchen set. We bought a couple of lamps and throw rugs for the wood floor. John had made a coffee table at a woodworking shop.
My mother and I had been accumulating a few linens and kitchen stuff for my hope chest. My co-workers gave me a shower as did John's co-workers. We received some small kitchen appliances and practical gifts With little expense we furnished our apartment and looked forward to sharing it together. But no car for transportation yet.
OUR WEDDING DAY
April 22, 1950: This day was the most important day of my life. We were pronounced man and wife at 10:10 a.m.
John's friend had an 8-mm camera and he took color movies of the whole affair. (Color was just becoming available on the film but with no sound). He gave the film to us as a gift. We have since converted the film to video tape and it is great to have this wonderful day recorded for our remembrance.
After the wedding breakfast, relatives and close friends of the family were invited to my parent's home to continue the celebration. About 4 pm, Johnny and I left in my father's Buick for Williamsburg about 30 miles away to spend the first night of our honeymoon at the Pocohantas motel. The next morning we went to Virginia Beach for a couple of days before moving into our little apartment to start our life together.
It was so much fun doing everything with Johnny, like making the bed together, cooking the meals, driving to work together in a little 1938 Dodge coupe that we bought for $150. Being married to Johnny was even better than I thought it was going to be.
35

36
August 1950
OUR FIRST HOUSE
Paying rent in an apartment wasn't what we wanted, so four months later we bought a little house at 618-74th Street, Newport News, Va. for $6,600. We put $1,000 down, with a 4% mortgage, and $50 monthly payment. The house was a cute little 4-room, 1-bath box on a quarter acre and the previous owners had already planted a garden which was bearing vegetables when we moved in. They left us a rabbit which was eaten by a dog a few weeks later. They had given their dog to the next door neighbor, but the dog kept hanging around our house waiting for her owners to return. So we adopted her. She eventually had a bunch of puppies in our garage and wouldn't let us get near her. She was a good dog but we finally had to take her to the pound.
The house had a hot water heater in the kitchen that we had to light with a match before we took a shower or washed clothes or dishes. I had a washing machine in the kitchen that I connected to the faucet in the sink to fill the tub. The cycles had to be changed manually from agitate to spin to drain, and then I had to fill the tub again for rinsing. It was quite modern for those days. Although winters in Virginia were mild, we had an occasional frost and we still needed some heat. We had a free-standing oil-burning heater in the center hall with no thermostat control. We lit it with a match when we were cold and turned it off when it got too hot. No air conditioner in the summer, of course, but we had a fan to circulate the air. We bought a radio that had a 78-rpm record player. Television was just becoming affordable and we bought a black and white used TV for $50 (with a 7 inch screen). Even though it didn't work very well, we thought it was great. We didn't have much compared to what newlyweds have today, but we were so happy, especially when I found out that I was pregnant. I quit my job immediately, which was what most women did back then. Unfortunately the pregnancy ended in a miscarriage two months later in October and I was so sad.
We traded our '38 Dodge for a new 1950 Ford that cost $1750. We had to pay extra for turn signals and a heater. Cars had none of the luxury features of today. We didn't even have a radio.
A few months later, my parents decided to buy a house just like ours just 2 blocks away. It was nice having them and my brothers close by, but staying home all day without Johnny was no fun. In May 1951, I decided to go back to work. After working only 2 weeks, I found out I was pregnant again, so I quit my job again.
OUR FIRST CHILD, MARK EDWARD
February 9, 1952 - Our first son, Mark Edward, was born at the Riverside Hospital in Newport News on a Saturday morning. He weighed 8 pounds 2 ounces, and was 20 inches long. John and my parents drove me to the hospital around midnight. The doctor said there was nothing John could do around there so they sent him home. Husbands were not allowed to assist in delivery in those days. I was given some kind of gas in a mask over my face to ease the pain and Mark was born at 6:30 am. The doctors couldn't get him to breathe for a long time so he was kept in an incubator for two days. I stayed in the hospital for 9 days, the usual time for hospital deliveries. Johnny had been going to
36

FARE
37
daily mass before work to pray for a healthy baby and Mark was normal in every way despite his breathing difficulty at first. Later I found out that Mark didn't breathe for 18 minutes after he was born. I believe that John's going to mass to pray for him is what was responsible for Mark's normal survival. We took Mark home and didn't really know what to do with this little bundle. There were no baby classes then so my mother showed us how to bathe and change him. We bought Dr. Spock's book and that helped a lot.
I nursed Mark for awhile but had to supplement with formula because he wanted to eat every two hours all night and I wasn't getting enough sleep. The formula consisted of canned evaporated milk, water and karo syrup. Mark was a challenge for both of us but we enjoyed him so much. Johnny helped in every way to feed and bathe him and having this child seemed to make our little family complete.
OUR MOVE TO CALIFORNIA
July 1953: John was not happy with his work at NACA. The name was later changed to the National Aeronautics and Space Agency (NASA) when we entered the space age. I encouraged him to look around for another job. We had talked about going to California as jobs for aeronautical engineers were plentiful. He sent an application to North American Aviation in Downey, California, and he was hired for $6,500 a year without an interview.
We put our house for sale and bought a 33 foot mobile home, which we were going to live in while we supposedly enjoyed site-seeing across the country to California. Our 1950 Ford didn't have enough power to tow the trailer adequately so we traded it for a 1953 Packard with a larger engine. We invited my brother, Billy, age 12, to come along We said our goodbye's to Mother and Dad (who were very upset and see the country. about the whole thing) and started off. John took some movies of that scene. We planned to drive up to Minnesota to visit John's folks, then down through the middle of the country to take the southern route to California which was supposed to be an easier tow.
The day we left, Mark came down with some kind of intestinal virus and started to run a high fever. He didn't eat anything that day or the next and was having diarrhea. He was getting dehydrated, and I was afraid he would die on the trip. By the end of the second day Mark was so sick. We had reached Youngstown, Ohio, and I knew we just couldn't continue any further. We drove to the airport and John put us on a plane, a Douglas DC-3, back to Newport News. My very first plane ride. We didn't have to make reservations ahead of time in those days. We stayed with my parents until John could send for us when he arrived in California. Billy continued with John, who planned to stop in Hibbing to visit his parents. While there he came down with a bad cold and stayed there until he was well enough to continue.
It was so hot across the country in July. The Packard was not equipped to handle the large load and was overheating. John dropped the trailer off in Oklahoma and hired a man to pull it the rest of the way. He and Billy continued to California and selected a mobile home park for our trailer in the town of Downey, just a few miles north of Long Beach and about 1 1/2 miles from the North American Company. Meanwhile our home in Virginia sold with all the furniture for $7500. With what we had already paid on it, we realized $4000 cash which was a lot of money for a young married couple at the time.
37

RE
38
When the house trailer arrived in California, John sent for Mark and me. He started his new job working on the Navaho, an intercontinental missile launched vertically by rocket and powered in level flight by a ram jet engine. It was a very advanced system for its day.
We tried to live frugally and saved something from every check. We never went to the movies and seldom had dinner out. We usually purchased what we needed from Sear's catalog, which used to be an inexpensive way to shop. We bought a 17-inch black and white television for $250 (no color yet).
California was a disappointment to us. The air was so smoggy and Mark was sick more than he was well. The doctor said the smog didn't agree with him, and John wasn't too thrilled with the job situation. Then I found out I was pregnant and I wanted to come back east. Johnny again applied by mail to Piasecki Helicopter Company in Morton, PA (now Boeing) and he was offered a job at $7,000 a year.
MOVE TO PENNSYLVANIA
December 1953: Mark and I flew to my parents home from California and waited there until John drove the car back. He had our trailer towed to a mobile home park in Chester, Pa. We came back to a snowy winter and we decided to sell our trailer and rent an apartment. We bought a crib and the bare necessities and settled in to wait for the birth of our second baby. We lived in Chester for only a few months and John realized that his job was not working out as he was told it would. In the summer of 1954 he answered an ad in the local paper for engineers at the Martin Company in Baltimore, Maryland. He drove down for an interview and was offered a job for $7,500 a year. He accepted and while there he rented a two-bedroom unit at the Drumcastle Apartments in North Baltimore, but we did not move until the baby was born.
OUR SECOND CHILD, PAUL EDWARD
July 15, 1954: Paul Edward, was born at 9:30 am on a Thursday, at Lankenau Hospital, Philadelphia. He weighed 8 lbs, 3 oz. and was 21 inches long. He had a beautiful deep dimple in his cheek from the day he was born. My mother came up from Newport News, VA to help take care of Mark who was a very active two and a half year old. I stayed in the hospital for a week. It was a new hospital but some sort of thrush infection was affecting lots of the babies and Paul got it. I had to paint his mouth after every feeding with a medicine called Gentian Violet. His mouth was purple for the first couple of months after his birth but he was so good and hardly ever cried.
August 4, 1954: Two weeks after Paul was born we moved to Baltimore. It was a scorching hot day (104 degrees) and the movers arrived late. We left Chester about noon and had to stop in Havre de Grace, Md. to see my mother's father, Grandpop Joe, who was in his eighties at the time. It was such a long tiresome day for me as I hadn't really gotten my strength back yet. I was so hot and exhausted when we finally arrived at the un-airconditioned apartment. We tried to unpack just enough to settle in for the night but it was too much for me. That night I started to hemorrhage and I was so frightened. John was able to contact a doctor who prescribed medication and complete rest for a few
38

CO
39
days. I was so glad my mother was with me because John had to start his new job right away. Six weeks later I was surprised to find out that I was pregnant again.
OUR THIRD CHILD, DONNA JOAN
June 16, 1955: Our first daughter, Donna Joan, was born at Maryland General Hospital in Baltimore, Maryland. She weighed 7 pounds 11 ounces. She had a full head of curly black hair and looked like a little oriental baby. She was very active and would push herself up to the top of her crib or carriage when she was less than a month old.
We were outgrowing the two-bedroom apartment so we began to hunt for a house. We found a nice community that was being developed in Towson, Maryland, called Campus Hills. We contracted to have our house built at 520 Epson Road, which was about 1/2 mile from Towson Plaza Shopping Center, and across from Goucher College. The house cost $17,500 and we obtained a $12,500 mortgage at 5% interest. We moved in September 1956 and in March 1957 I was pregnant again.
OUR FOURTH CHILD, CAROL ANN
December 23, 1957: Carol Ann was born a week early and only weighed 6 lb. 5 oz. We brought her home Christmas morning, our very precious Christmas present. 1958 was a difficult year for us trying to raise four little children, the oldest only six years of age. But the kids were very good and a real joy. John was such a big help whenever he was home. We were always so busy but were content except for the fact that we were concerned for my father who was very sick. We tried to visit whenever we could, but traveling from Baltimore to Newport News, VA was a long trip with the children - about 4 hours.
December 22, 1958: The day my father Alexander died. He had been ill for quite a long time and the doctors could not find out what was wrong with him. He began to worry that he would not be able to work so he got very depressed. Medical insurance in those days was not available to most, and if my father didn't work he didn't get paid. Doctors didn't know in those days what they do now and they gave him electric shock treatments which were supposed to help but they really didn't. Finally he was diagnosed as having bladder cancer.
Dad had been a heavy smoker for years and also worked with red dyes and asbestos, all of which probably caused his illness. He had his bladder removed, but after the operation he tried to pull himself out of bed and the stitches came apart. This caused internal bleeding and he died shortly after. Dad was very close to the Lord in those last days and he told my mother that he had had a real vision of Jesus a couple of days before and I knew he was finally at rest. He was buried on December 26th, the day after Christmas in Newport News, Virginia. My mother had a hard time of it and was in depression for a very long time.
She eventually sold her home and came to live with us in 1960. She learned how to drive a car at age 50 so she could get around on her own. Her driving escapades are another story. We realized we again needed more room so we contracted to have another house built at 205 Welford Road, Lutherville, not too far from Campus Hills. It cost $35,000 and we were able to put $15,000 down payment. While the house was being built I got
39

FARE
40
pregnant again. We put our house for sale and prayed that it would be sold by the time the other one was completed.
OUR FIFTH CHILD, GUY ALEXANDER
August 19, 1961: Guy Alexander (named after both grandfathers) was born in Baltimore, Maryland. He weighed 7 lbs. 7 oz. Labor was induced because he was over 2 weeks late. He looked so much like Mark as a baby that I could have identified him in the nursery before they brought him to me. We took him home and waited for our house to be sold
and the new one finished.
Our prayers were answered, the house was sold for $21,500 in time for us to May 1962: move into our lovely new 5-bedroom, 3-bath home. My mother had a room of her own, but shortly thereafter she said she was going to marry Gilbert Seitz. We were not too happy about it because I didn't think she really loved him, but she wanted a place of her own again. She believed that she was being an extra burden to us (which she really wasn't, but I understood the way she felt). We lived in Lutherville for 5 years, made many nice friends, and enjoyed the childrens' years from kindergarten (Guy), elementary school (Carol) through junior high (Mark, Paul and Donna). There were some First Communions and Confirmations along the way. But soon the Martin Company began to lay people off and John realized he would have to find employment elsewhere. We began to pray together saying the Rosary Novena, a special prayer in honor of Jesus and say for 54 days when they want a special favor from God. Mary which Catholics Although Mary is honored as Jesus' mother, the prayers are a meditation of Jesus' life, his death, resurrection and ascension into heaven and the coming of the Holy Ghost. In the meantime, John applied for other jobs.
Spring 1967: John got a tentative job offer from General Electric Aerospace Division in Valley Forge, Pa. We began to take trips to the area to look for a house. We found a lovely house in the woods at 660 Rittenhouse Lane, Strafford-Wayne, near Valley Forge, and made an offer for $43,500, contingent on a firm job offer. We had a prospective buyer for our house, but John wouldn't sign the papers until he received a written confirmation of the job offer. We signed the contract for the sale of our house on the 54th day of the novena, the official job offer having been telegraphed the night before, another miracle for us.
July 1967: We moved into our beautiful contemporary home on a hill in the woods. It had windows all around and looked down on a kidney-shaped swimming pool. It had a long tree-lined driveway and was very secluded. The children made friends right away by inviting them to swim and I met some nice neighbors. Guy started first grade and Carol, fourth, at New Eagle Elementary. Donna and Paul in eighth grade at Valley Forge Junior High and Mark, tenth grade at Conestoga High School. We promised to get our children a dog if we had to move, so one week after we settled in we bought little Terry, part golden retriever and part collie, and she became a special part of our family.
Summer 1968: My mother came to live with me again so I accepted a part-time job as secretary in an office 3 miles away. I hadn't worked for 18 years but it was easy to get back into things. I worked 5 hours a day and was home before the children got home from school. stayed there for 6 months, then for a builder for 6 months, then worked for a
40

41
traveling sales manager in his home for two years. It was an opportunity to get back into the work force, improve my skills, and earn some extra money besides.
Living in Wayne was great. The children did well at school and had great summers in the pool. Mark and Donna were in the high school band. Mark was drum major in his senior year. He was accepted at Penn State and went to State College, PA in July 1970.
After a year and a half at General Electric, John changed jobs again. He was hired by Boeing in Chester, Pa. but by the end of 1970, things were slowing up and there were many layoffs. John got a layoff notice on January 4, 1971. We were not surprised, and putting our trust once more in God, our whole family began to pray the rosary novena again. The lay-off was temporarily postponed the next day.
John started applying for jobs and making contacts. On the 54th day of the novena, Bill Brubaker (an old Martin Co. friend) called from Washington, DC to say that John should send in an application because there might be a job possibility with the Department of Transportation. We started another novena and -- 54 days later --- April 21, 1971: John was offered a job as a automotive safety standards engineer at $18,500 a year. We sold our house in 90 days for $9000 more than we paid for it, and moved in July to a large 4-bedroom colonial house in Severna Park.
August 1971: Although the children missed the swimming pool we had in Pennsylvania they didn't complain. One night an ad in the local paper caught my attention. A mobilehome in Ocean City, MD. was for sale. The following Saturday we drove to see it. And that was the beginning of our Ocean City experience. We bought the trailer in Warren's Trailer Park for $5600. it was a block from the ocean, right on the bay and we bought a little boat. That started our vacations at Ocean City, where the children worked for the next several summers earning all their spending money. At first they worked at the Jolly Roger amusement park. Later, Carol worked at a Candy Kitchen and Guy worked for a marina. He drove a boat that pulled parasailers, the first one in Ocean city.
The summer of 1971 was an adjustment for the children but they soon made friends in the new neighborhood. Mark continued college at Penn State through the summer. In September, Paul and Donna began their senior year at Severna Park High School. Guy started 4th grade and Carol 6th grade at Benfield Elementary School one-half mile away. Paul and Donna joined Campus Life, a Christian youth program, and they made some good friends. The next June, Paul and Donna graduated from Severna Park High with honors. Donna won a national merit scholarship award.
September 1972: Paul started college at the University of Maryland and Donna at Towson State, both as resident students. I got a job with the Maryland Department of Education at the BWI airport on a full time basis, but was able to take off during the summer to spend at Ocean City with the children. Mark graduated from Penn State in 3 years, accepted a scholarship at Georgia State University to study for his master's degree in communications. Then he received another master's degree in Urban Development from Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. He paid his own tuition by working part-time for the State at BWI airport. He was supporting himself by playing drums with a nice dance band at weddings, etc. and never asked for any help. He was always very self sufficient.
41

42
September 8, 1974: Donna's wedding day! Donna married Gus at our home in Severna Park. She was only 19, but they both knew and loved the Lord, and she always seemed to know what she wanted, so I put them in His hands, although the going was really Donna finished her senior year at Frostburg State rough for them for quite awhile. College, and started teaching in Cumberland, MD. While Gus ran his wood working shop.
September 1976: I started working not far from home at the Regional Office of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), part of the Department of Transportation.
December 18, 1976: Paul's wedding day! Paul had graduated from the University of Maryland in June with a Bachelor of Science degree (Zoology). He had dated Laurie Macauley ever since high school. Their wedding was lovely and most of the their church attended (Church of Christ). They bought a little house, the down payment being supplied by Laurie's grandmother, Gammy.
Carol was attending Anne Arundel Community College. One day November 17, 1977: she was almost kidnapped by two men as she was leaving the parking lot. The abductors couldn't start her Ford Pinto because it would only start when safety belts were engaged. Carol was not about to tell them that. Her friend, Bootie, came running when he sensed some danger (God's instrument) and the men ran away. She was saved by the Lord, but was really shook up for a long time afterward. Especially me. Thank you, Jesus, for saving her from only God knows what. We heard in the news a few days later that a girl was killed in another area by the same type of car abduction.
May 1978: I applied for a position in Washington and was hired as a secretary GS-5 rating, at NHTSA where John worked, and became the fifth person in John's carpool. It was great to have lunch with him every day.
October 1978: Carol graduated from Arundel Community College in May, worked at the ocean during the summer, had four wisdom teeth removed in September and got a government job at Naval Service Weapons in White Oak, MD. in October. She lived in an apartment supporting herself, but I don't think she was very happy. I prayed for her a lot.
January 1979: My 50th birthday was spent on a cruise ship in the Carribean. We stopped at 5 islands and had a great time. Even though we got stuck in Puerto Rico the last day because of a snow storm in Chicago (where our charter plane was supposed to take off). Can you imagine being snowbound in Puerto Rico? The cruise was a great experience. The only thing wrong was that we got home 3 days late and I missed taking a special test at work that would have qualified me for an upward mobility professional position. However, God caused an unusual set of circumstances whereby I applied for a job with the Civil Rights director. I told him about why I missed the exam. Since two others had also missed it, he requested another test be given especially for us. I did well and I was awarded one of the upward mobility positions with the opportunity to attain a GS-12 level. It was hard going at first, but within a short time I was on my way.
June 1979:
Guy graduated from high school and became a resident student at the University of Maryland, course of study - "undecided".
42

43
November Stewart, a
grandchildren July 19, 1983.
24, 1979:
Paul and Laurie gave us our first grandchild, Joseph beautiful blond baby with dark brown eyes. They have given us two more - beautiful Samantha Ross, born September 27, 1981, and John Paul born
January 1980: John and I had been considering where we would like to live when we So one lovely sunny day in January we went retire. We finally decided on Ocean Pines. site-seeing for lots and picked out our canal front lot at 11 Sandpiper Lane. We did not intend to build on it yet as we would need about $18,000 cash to start. A couple of months later, Rita, John's sister, called to say that she was sending us some savings bonds that John's mother had been buying for her children for several years. When we went to cash them, guess what, their total worth was exactly $18,000. We felt this was our go ahead to build, so we started construction in July 1980, and put our trailer at the ocean for sale. We didn't have much ready cash at that time because our worth was in our houses, the Severna Park home and the Ocean City trailer home.
-
March 30, 1981: With the children all gone, the house in Severna Park was too big for just John and I and too far from work so we decided to put the house for sale. I asked God to send a buyer within 90 days if he thought we should move. Another miracle - on the 90th day we got our first and only offer. This really was a miracle because the real estate market was not good. Mortgage interest rates had risen to 16%.
By this time we had lived in Severna Park for 10 years. Much happened during that time, but the most wonderful was that Paul, Donna, Carol and Guy had joined Campus Life and had given their lives to Jesus.
April
1981: Our retirement house, which I designed, was finished and beautiful. We furnished it and began to spend every weekend and vacations in the Pines. During these years there were so many times that we prayed to God, asking for His blessing and that He would keep us all safe. Little things would happen to let us know that He really was watching over us. Like the time we left Ocean City for home and our car was not acting right. The car huffed and puffed and gave its last final gasp just as we pulled into a gas station on Hwy 50 after leaving Hwy 404, the first we had seen in several miles. We just sat there thanking God for making our breakdown not as bad as it could have been. The generator had failed and the battery was not getting its needed charging. The station attendant charged the battery and that was enough to get us home.
August 1981: We bought a nice new split foyer house at 9901 Woodstream Court in Seabrook, MD. only 16 miles from downtown Washington. Carol decided to come live in the lower level which was like her own apartment. We found a buyer for our trailer, thanks to Guy's effort, and settled on both the very same week.
February 1982: Mark went to work in Saudi Arabia. I believe this job opportunity was God's will for Mark's life at this time, but I knew I was going to miss him so much.
August 1982: This was a very difficult year for John and I at NHTSA because of large government cutbacks, a reduction in force was required. I was going to be reduced in grade from a GS-9 Program Analyst to a GS-5 secretary again, and John was even
43

44
concerned about his job because there were veterans and others with more years of with all employees but I terrible service who would be given priority. Morale was
kept on personalizing proverbs 3:5-6: "I will trust in God with all my heart and lean not unto my own understanding. In all my ways I will acknowledge Him, and He will direct my paths." I talked to a few people in management, trying to persuade them that I was the only person who knew how to track state legislation regarding safety belt use and drunk driving laws, so when the effective date came around, my prayers were answered and John and I kept our positions.
This was the summer that Carol and Henry got to know and enjoy each other and they had a great time together at the ocean. She met him while working at Naval Surface Weapons. He is an interesting person, intelligent and knowledgeable about many things.
January 29, 1983: Carol's wedding day! Carol and Henry got married in our Woodstream house. Henry's parents and sister came down from Connecticut, and it was a very nice occasion. I believed he would take good care of Carol and be faithful to her.
May 14, 1983: Donna gave birth to a little daughter, Jennifer, after 9 years of marriage. We were so happy for them and wished they didn't live so far away in Cumberland.
May 19, 1984: Guy's wedding day! Guy and Anna Marie got married in the chapel at the University of Maryland. They left in his new little Honda for field work in Wyoming, a requirement in order for him to receive his bachelor's degree in geology. He had not received any job offers prior to his leaving for Wyoming so we all prayed that God would find one for him when he returned.
September 1984: Our prayers were answered very soon as God did find a job for Guy at the State of New Jersey Environmental Protection Department in Trenton. They rented a nice little apartment and Anna Marie enrolled at Trenton State College to finish her education. Guy's job was really another miraculous answer to prayer, as it was the only interview he had. Thank you, Jesus. Guy's family returned to live in Ft. Washington, MD and he is now employed as a ground water geologist at the U.S. Government Environmental Protection Agency. Guy and Anna Marie now have three children: Teresa Marie born on January 5, 1985, Michael Guy born March 11, 1988 and John David born October 1, 1990.
November 1987: In anticipation of our retirement in a few months, we sold our house in Seabrook and moved in with Paul and Laurie who were living in their new home in Bowie. We arranged to have their basement fixed into a nice bedroom and bath retreat and we enjoyed living with our grandchildren and sharing dinner with them every night. I had fallen and broken my leg, so for six weeks I had to climb up and down the stairs on my knees because of my cast and crutches.
April 14, 1988: Mark's wedding day! Mark married Frances Hoy, a lovely Scottish women he met in Saudi Arabia. They had a Catholic wedding in Bahrain. They returned to the United States and lived here for over a year as they awaited the birth of their little daughter, Joanna Christine. She was born on August 6, 1989. Then they moved to Brazilia, South America. James Edward was born there on November 16, 1990. Soon after they all returned to the U.S. Mark is now employed at the Fluor Company writing
44

45
proposals for government contracts. They live in Laurel, Md and they are very active in their Catholic church where Frances sings in the choir and the children are alter boy and alter girl.
April 27, 1988: This was a momentous day for John and I as we both retired from NHTSA. We were each given a lovely retirement luncheon and we looked forward to spend-ing our golden years living in Ocean Pines. We made a few changes to our home by enlarging the living-dining room and adding an enclosed porch to contain my new hot tub. We converted one of our garage stalls into an office in which John planned to use in his new career of Motor Vehicle Safety Consultant. He had planned on working part-time in his retirement and he was fortunate to become involved soon after with his first client, a lawyer from Texas. This was the start of a new adventure for us. I accompanied John on trips the next few years to several states including Texas, Virginia, California, Florida, Oregon, We looked at wrecked cars, met with lawyers, and John Pennsylvania and Louisiana.
testified at trials and depositions.
July 27, 1992: After trying for several years to become parents, Carol and Henry were fortunate enough to adopt a little girl that they named Joanna Christine. She was a beautiful baby with blond hair and blue eyes and was the answer to many years of prayer and effort. On October 30, 1995, they also adopted another child, a baby boy they named Eric Edward.
2001: At this point I could continue on about the accomplishments of my children and grandchildren. But I have to stop at some point if I am ever going to finish this story. Therefore, I will list the current occupations that my children and their spouses are involved in and in which they all excel. Then I will follow with the status of each of my grandchildren.
Mark Edward - Submits proposals for the Fluor Company and is responsible
for getting many contracts.
Frances (Mark's wife) -- Registered nurse assisting in the delivery of infants at the Washington Adventist Hospital
Paul Edward - Assistant Curator of the Bird House at the Washington
National Zoo.
Laurie (Paul's wife) Resource Director helping learning disability children at Cresthaven Elementary School
Donna Joan - Teaches History and Psychology at Sherwood High School. Gus (Donna's husband) - Space Manager for Federal buildings in
Washington, DC
Carol Ann - Stay-at-home mom with her younger children, but learning all she can about nutrition and natural hygiene; looking forward to a future career in this field.
Henry (Carol's husband) - Electronics Engineer for the Navy at Wallops Island, VA
Guy Alexander - Geologist at the Federal Environmental Protection Agency specializing in Ground Water Management
Anna Marie (Guy's wife) - Teacher using the Montessory method at the Flintstone Elementary School.
Mark's children- Joanna (12) and James (11) attend St. Joseph Catholic
45

46
Elementary School
Paul's children - Joey (22) will be graduating Flagler College in St. Augustine, FL in April.
Samantha (20) and John Paul (18) are attending Harding Christian
University in Arkansas
Donna's daughter Jenni (18) at U. of Maryland Baltimore Campus on 4-yr
full scholarship
Carol's children - Angela (9) and Eric (6) attend Holly Grove Christian school Guy's children - Teresa (17) McNamara Catholic High School;
Michael (14) and John David (11) attend St. Mary's Catholic Elementary. Michael will go to McNamara next year.
My grandchildren have excelled in many areas of which I can only name a few: Joey's artistic talents, Samantha's poise and grace, John Paul's music abilities, Jenni's intelligence and great writing abilities, Teresa's acting and swimming abilities, Michael and John David's swimming and other sports capabilities, Joanna's dancing and piano playing, James' soccer and baseball
abilities, Angela's good grades at school and Eric's impish charm. I'm sure I could have mentioned many more things that my eleven grandchildren have accomplished.
John and I are in relatively good health for our ages (73 and 76 as of this writing) although I've had a problem with a neuralgia in my face that seems to be untreatable with medication. We go to Florida twice a year, and get to see our family as often as we want to. John is still involved in consulting but cases are slowing down lately. I have spent some time recently in preparing a summary of the books in the bible.
I would like to finish this family history. There are events that will take place with our families in the near and distant future, and other than adding updates occasionally I must end now. However, a national event must be addressed to those who read this in the future. I don't know if and how it might effect the Tomassoni family. Only God knows.
September 11, 2001: A terrible date in the history of the United States. Moslem terrorists from Afganistan calling themselves the Talliban under the direction of a man named Osama Ben Laden hijacked four planes, crashing two of them into the top floors of the twin towers of the World Trade Center, killing over 3,000 people. The two buildings came crashing down burying many people including firemen and policemen that were trying to save the occupants. It was a miracle that many more weren't killed as there must have been over 10,000 in the buildings. Now three months later, the area is still smoldering and there is much debris that has to be cleared away.
About an hour later another plane crashed into the Pentagon in Virginia, destroying part of the building and killing several others besides the passengers in the plane. A fourth plane was also hijacked by the terrorists but the passengers in the plane, having heard by cell phone about what was happening, managed to cause the plane to crash into a field in Pennsylvania. This action certainly stopped another attack from being accomplished. The country went into shock and mourning for all the innocent people killed.
46

18
47
President Bush immediately began to make plans to punish all those involved in this terrorist act. A few weeks later our servicemen were sent to Afganistan, and now, 3 months later, we have all but eliminated the Taliban, but we have not been able to find Osama Ben Laden. However, our President has not given up the goal of fighting terrorism, not only in Afganistan but throughout the world.
There has also been an attack by an unknown person or persons who have tried to spread anthrax by using the postal service. Several people have been exposed and a few people who inhaled the spores actually died. We have not as yet found out where this scourge is coming from. But I know that since September 11th, many more people have turned to God and have been praying that our country will be protected against those that would
harm us.
So I close this story of the Tomassoni family with a prayer that God will continue to watch over us and keep us close to Him, and so that we may have the will to live each day in the light of His love. May He bless us all.
47